SOURCE: opening-remarks-may-2017.pdf
DATE: 201705
TYPE: opening
============================================================

1 
 
INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE 
Thursday 11th May 2017 
Opening Remarks by the Governor 
 
Good afternoon. 
The outlook for UK growth and inflation will continue to be influenced by the response of 
households, companies and financial markets to the prospects for the UK’s departure from 
the EU.  The MPC’s projections continue to be conditioned on a smooth transition to an 
average of possible outcomes for the UK’s post-Brexit trading arrangements. 
For some time, the responses of financial markets and households to the UK’s decision to 
leave the EU have diverged.  In its February projections, the MPC expected that this tension 
between consumer strength and relative financial market pessimism would be reduced over 
the course of this year.   
That process has now begun.  With wage growth moderating and inflation picking up, both 
household spending and GDP growth have slowed markedly.  In contrast, sterling has 
appreciated, possibly reflecting market expectations of a more orderly Brexit process.  
On balance, the Committee judges that consumption growth will be slower in the near term 
than previously anticipated before recovering in the latter part of the forecast period as real 
incomes pick up. 
The Committee’s latest projections 
In the MPC’s central forecast, quarterly growth is forecast to stabilise around its current rate, 
resulting in growth of 1.9% in 2017 and around 1¾% in each of the next two years.  This is 
broadly as the Committee had expected in February. 


2 
 
The global outlook has improved further since February, with stronger business surveys and 
generally better financial conditions.  The latest indicators, including trade growth and capital 
goods orders, suggest broad-based strength.  And signs of more robust global demand have 
also been reflected in global asset prices, with equity prices rising further in recent months.  
The MPC’s projection for world GDP growth remains near the top of the range of external 
forecasts.   
The combination of the stronger global outlook and sterling’s past depreciation is likely to 
support UK net trade.  And together with somewhat lower uncertainty, stronger global 
growth is also likely to encourage investment as exporters renew and increase capacity.   
Turning to inflation, CPI inflation has risen above the MPC’s 2% target as sterling’s past 
depreciation has begun to feed through to consumer prices.  This impact has been offset to 
some extent by continued subdued growth in domestic costs, with wage growth notably 
weaker than expected.   
The MPC expects inflation to rise further above the target in the coming months, peaking a 
little below 3% in the fourth quarter.  Conditioned on the market yield curve, inflation is 
projected to remain above the MPC’s target throughout the forecast period.  The yield curve 
has steepened slightly and sterling has rallied somewhat since the forecast was closed. 
The projected inflation overshoot entirely reflects the effects on import prices of the fall in 
sterling since late November 2015—a depreciation caused by market expectations of a 
material adjustment to the UK’s medium term prospects as it leaves the EU.  
The contribution to inflation of higher import prices is likely to fade gradually throughout the 
forecast period.  The extent to which domestic cost pressures pick up will determine where 
CPI inflation settles towards the end of the forecast.   


3 
 
Wage growth has been soft in recent years despite strong employment growth.  Weakness in 
productivity growth and a continuing drag from slack have contributed to this softness, but 
they cannot explain its full extent.  Uncertainty of companies about the outlook may also 
have made them unwilling to raise wages at a faster pace until they have more clarity about 
future costs and market access.   
The MPC judges that the factors currently weighing on wage growth are unlikely to persist, 
and it projects that wages will rise significantly as the output gap narrows throughout the 
forecast period and closes by the end.   
As a result, inflation is projected to rise in the third year of the forecast even as the impact of 
imported price pressures diminishes.   
Policy decision 
Monetary policy cannot prevent either the necessary real adjustment as the UK moves 
towards its new international trading arrangements or the weaker real income growth that is 
likely to accompany that adjustment over the next few years.  Attempting to offset fully the 
effect of weaker sterling on inflation would be achievable only at the cost of higher 
unemployment and, in all likelihood, even weaker income growth.  For this reason, the 
MPC’s remit specifies that, in such exceptional circumstances, the Committee must balance 
any trade-off between the speed with which it intends to return inflation to the target and the 
support that monetary policy provides to jobs and activity. 
At its May meeting, the MPC decided that the current stance of monetary policy remained 
appropriate to balance the demands of its remit.  The actual and prospective overshoot of 
inflation relative to target is entirely due to the effects of sterling’s depreciation, which itself 
reflects fundamental factors that monetary policy could not affect.  In such exceptional 


4 
 
circumstances, the MPC’s remit requires it to pay close consideration to the trade-off between 
inflation and slack.  For most of the forecast period, the economy is expected to operate with 
a degree of spare capacity, justifying that some degree of above-target inflation could be 
tolerated.  The output gap is projected to close by the end of the forecast, however, reducing 
the Committee’s tolerance for above-target inflation at that point.   
The MPC’s forecast relies on, amongst other things:  
- 
a significant pick-up in wage growth;  
- 
no further slowing in aggregate demand;  
- 
the lower level of sterling continuing to boost consumer prices broadly as projected, 
without adverse consequences for inflation expectations further ahead; and  
- 
the adjustment to the UK’s new relationship with the EU being smooth.   
As these conditions make clear, while Brexit will play an important role, other factors will 
also influence the outlook for the economy and inflation.  In judging the appropriateness of 
the monetary stance, the Committee will monitor closely incoming evidence regarding a 
range of factors.  
Monetary policy will respond in either direction to changes in the economic outlook as they 
unfold to ensure a sustainable return of inflation to target, while supporting the necessary real 
adjustments in the economy. 
On the whole, the Committee judges that, if the economy follows a path broadly consistent 
with its central projection, then monetary policy could need to be tightened by a somewhat 
greater extent over the forecast horizon than the very gently rising path implied by the market 
yield curve at the time of the forecast.   
 
