SOURCE: opening-remarks-february-2018.pdf
DATE: 201802
TYPE: opening
============================================================

1 
INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE 
Thursday 8th February 2018 
Opening Remarks by the Governor 
This has been a notable week for anniversaries.  On Monday, the nation celebrated the 
centenary of women gaining the vote.  And, in the category of words not deeds, today marks 
a quarter of a century since the first Inflation Report.  Though the style of the Report may 
have changed over the years, the Bank’s commitment to explaining monetary policy 
independently and transparently has not.  
So what is the picture painted in the 101st edition?   
Demand and Supply Growth 
One truth universally acknowledged is the current strength of the world economy.   
Global growth is stronger, broader and healthier than it has been for some time.  The global 
economy is growing at its fastest pace in seven years;  90% of the world is now growing at 
above-trend rates;  and the global expansion is being increasingly driven by investment. 
UK net trade is benefiting from this robust global demand and the past depreciation of 
sterling.  Whereas it usually drags on growth, net trade is currently contributing substantially 
and is likely to continue supporting activity over the forecast period.  British exporters are in 
a sweet spot, with sterling down around 16% overall (and around 20% against the euro) in 
anticipation of a Brexit that has not yet happened.   
Along with high rates of profitability, the low cost of capital, and diminishing spare capacity, 
strong global activity is also supporting business investment.  Nevertheless investment is 
being restrained by Brexit-related uncertainties.  This remains the shallowest investment 
recovery in more than half a century. 


2 
Consumption growth has also been sluggish, as households adjust to the real income squeeze.  
Growth in household spending halved since the referendum, and is expected to remain 
relatively subdued over the next three years, reflecting weak real income growth.  
On the whole, and despite the projections being conditioned on less supportive monetary 
conditions prevailing in financial markets, GDP growth is expected to average around 1.75% 
over the forecast period, a little stronger than projected in November.  
While modest by historic standards, this demand growth is still expected to exceed the 
diminished rate of supply growth over the forecast period. 
Following its annual assessment of the supply side of the economy, the MPC judges that very 
little spare capacity remains and that supply capacity will grow only modestly over the 
forecast, averaging around 1.5% a year.  This reflects lower growth in labour supply and 
productivity growth at rates around half its pre-crisis average.   
With growth in demand outpacing of supply, a small margin of excess demand emerges by 
early 2020 and builds thereafter.   
Inflation 
CPI inflation fell from 3.1% in November to 3.0% in December.  Inflation is expected to 
remain close to recent rates in the short term, slightly higher than the projection made three 
months ago largely as a consequence of recent higher oil prices.  It is possible that inflation 
could rise back above 3% temporarily in the short term. 
More generally, sustained above-target inflation remains almost entirely due to the effects of 
higher import prices following sterling’s past depreciation.  This impact of import prices on 


3 
CPI inflation is still expected to diminish slowly, with import prices pushing marginally up 
inflation at the end of the three-year forecast period. 
While the contribution from external factors slowly dissipates, domestic inflationary 
pressures are likely to firm as the economy moves from excess supply into excess demand.  
Unemployment has continued to fall, recently reaching its lowest level since 1975.  The 
firming of shorter-term measures of wage growth in recent quarters, and a range of survey 
indicators that suggests pay growth will rise further in response to the tightening labour 
market, give increasing confidence that growth in wages and unit labour costs will pick up to 
target-consistent rates. 
The balance of these effects means that CPI inflation is projected to fall back gradually over 
the forecast although it remains above the 2% target in the second and third years of the 
MPC’s central projection. 
Forecasts  
As has been the case for some time, developments regarding the United Kingdom’s 
withdrawal from the European Union are the most significant influences on, and sources of 
uncertainty about, the economic outlook.   
But the fact that Brexit negotiations entail significant uncertainty doesn’t mean forecasting is 
impossible.  It is useful to step back to assess how the economy has performed relative to the 
MPC’s expectations in order to understand the forces at work on it. 
 Over the past year, the MPC has been at the upper end of forecasts for the global and 
UK economies.  We have been right about those directions though the global 
economy has been even stronger than we had expected while the UK economy has 
been broadly in line with our forecast last February. 


4 
 The MPC has expected a rotation of demand in the UK away from household 
consumption and towards net exports and investment.  This appears to be happening, 
particularly with net trade contributing importantly to UK growth this year.  And 
household spending growth has been restrained by the real income squeeze, a squeeze 
that is expected to ease but not end over the next few years.   
 The MPC has also been expecting a firming of wages as the labour market tightens 
and the rate of productivity growth recovers somewhat.  Both appear to be underway.   
 And finally, imported inflationary pressures arising from the referendum-related fall 
in sterling have been in line with our expectations and are still expected to be the 
predominant cause of the overshoot of inflation throughout our forecast.   
Policy 
In the exceptional circumstances prevailing since the referendum, the MPC has set policy to 
balance the trade-off between the speed at which inflation returns to target and the support 
that monetary policy provides to jobs and activity.  Our understanding of the contours of 
economic developments since the referendum has meant this strategy has worked with 
employment rising and slack steadily being absorbed despite the sharp hit to household real 
incomes.   
As outlined in my letter today to the Chancellor, the steady absorption of slack has reduced 
the degree to which it is appropriate for the MPC to accommodate an extended period of 
inflation above the target.  Consequently, in November, the MPC began to remove some 
stimulus, raising Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points to 0.5 per cent.   


5 
Three months on, the prospect of a greater degree of excess demand and the expectation that 
inflation would remain above the target over the forecast period have further diminished the 
trade-off that the MPC is required to balance.  
The MPC judges that, were the economy to evolve broadly in line with its February Inflation 
Report projections, monetary policy would need to be tightened somewhat earlier and by a 
somewhat greater extent over the forecast period than it anticipated at the time of the 
November Report, in order to return inflation sustainably to the target.  All members agree 
that any future increases in Bank Rate are expected to be at a gradual pace and to a limited 
extent.   
The economic outlook will continue to evolve.  There will be ups and downs in financial 
markets. The Brexit process will twist and turn before it is concluded.   
Whatever happens, the Committee will monitor developments closely and will respond to 
ensure that inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target.   
This principled, consistent and transparent approach to monetary policy is the best 
contribution that the MPC can make to monetary stability and therefore to the good of the 
people of the United Kingdom in these exceptional circumstances. 
