SOURCE: opening-remarks-august-2023.pdf
DATE: 202308
TYPE: opening
============================================================

MONETARY POLICY REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE 
Thursday 3 August 2023 
Opening Remarks by Andrew Bailey, Governor 
 
 
Today’s monetary policy decision  
Consumer price inflation fell further to 7.9% in June.  That is what we expected to 
see.  It is good news.  And inflation will continue to fall over the coming months. 
Monetary policy is restrictive.  It is working to bring inflation down. 
Our job is to make absolutely sure that inflation falls all the way back to the 2% target 
and stays low.   
So today we have increased Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 5.25%. 
Low and stable inflation is the foundation of a healthy economy.  High inflation hurts 
the least well off the most.   
The projection we present today is very much in two parts.  I will begin with the first 
part – the near-term outlook for inflation over the remainder of this year – before 
turning to the second – the medium-term outlook and the implications for monetary 
policy. 
 
The near-term outlook for inflation 
Chart 1 shows the evolution of consumer price inflation – and its components – since 
2018.  It shows how inflation has come off its October peak.  It continues to fall over 
the rest of this year in our near-term projection, shown in the shaded area. 


 
This fall can be attributed in large part to a falling contribution from energy.  Fuel 
prices have declined, and electricity and gas prices have stabilised, albeit at a higher 
level.  The dark orange bars show how the contribution from energy prices is falling 
and turning negative in the coming months.  
Given Ofgem’s price cap on electricity and gas bills – and the way it slows down the 
passthrough of wholesale energy prices to consumer bills – we expect inflation to 
take a further step down in July’s data published in two weeks’ time, to around 7%, 
followed by another larger step down in October’s data, to around 5%.   
This more gradual passthrough also substantially helps to explain the difference 
between current headline inflation in the United Kingdom and the euro area, where 
wholesale energy prices feed more directly through to consumer prices. 
Where there is more uncertainty is around the time it will take the other non-energy 
components of the consumer price inflation to come down as well.  
Price inflation for food and non-alcoholic beverages has been very high.  But it does 
appear to have peaked, and as you can see in Chart 2, there are signs in the 
monthly figures that it has started to ease.  Evidence collected by the Bank’s regional 
Agents suggests that a moderation in food input prices is being passed through the 
supply chain to consumer prices.  So we expect food price inflation to come down 
gradually over the rest of the year.   


 
The contribution from food price inflation falls accordingly in our near-term projection, 
from about 2 percentage points today to about 1¼ percentage points towards the 
end of the year.  
Similarly, core goods price inflation continues to be broad-based.  It is taking time for 
the fall in energy prices to work through the supply chain, and the prices of imported 
goods have continued to rise despite a fall in world export prices.  That is why, in our 
central projection, we expect core goods price inflation to come down only gradually. 
But let me be clear, we do expect goods price inflation to ease over the rest of the 
year, and there are indicators that suggest it could happen faster than in our 
projection. 
As you can see in Chart 3, output producer price inflation, which measures the 
change in the price of goods sold by UK manufacturers, has been slowing 
significantly since its peak in mid-2022, as indicated by the orange line.  That should 
help to reduce non-energy consumer goods price inflation, shown here in blue, as 
cost pressures ease in the supply chain.  As the Chart shows, that has been the 
case when producer price inflation have fallen in the past.  
 


 
The final component of inflation is services prices, which is now contributing more to 
inflation than energy or goods.  Here, there has been unwelcome news since May.  
As you can see in Chart 4, service price inflation was 7.2% in June, higher than we 
projected in May, and it remains high in our near-term projection for the rest of the 
year.   
 
The upside surprise was primarily driven by some of the more volatile sub-
components of services price inflation, such as airfares and package holidays – and 
also Vehicle Excise Duty, which is unrelated to the balance of demand and supply in 
the economy.  We should not read too much into this surprise for this reason.   


Nevertheless, since other sub-components of services price inflation are closely 
linked to underlying cost pressures in the UK economy, continued strength in 
services price inflation may suggest that high inflation could persist for longer.  
  
The medium-term outlook for inflation  
So let me turn to the second part of the story – the medium-term outlook.   
Over the medium term, of course, monetary policy has to ensure that inflation returns 
to target in a timely manner.  That is why the Monetary Policy Committee is watching 
services price inflation very carefully, along with other indicators of inflation 
persistence. 
Economic activity has shown some unexpected resilience over recent quarters.  But 
the increases in Bank Rate we have implemented weigh to an increasing degree on 
UK economic activity.  There is evidence that monetary policy is restrictive.  
As we look into 2024, GDP growth is projected to be weaker than expected in the 
May Monetary Policy Report.  And the balance of demand and supply is shifting in 
our projection.  An increasing degree of economic slack is emerging after the middle 
of next year.   
This will help to reduce inflationary pressures in the UK economy.  
As the Chart 5 illustrates, in the MPC’s projection for consumer price inflation, which 
is conditional on the market path for interest rates, inflation is more likely to end the 
forecast period below the 2% target than above it, if only slightly.  In the modal – or 
‘most likely’ – case, inflation is 1.7% in two years’ time and 1.5% in the third quarter 
of 2026.  The Committee continues to judge, however, that risks around that central 
case are skewed towards higher inflation.  Adjusting the modal projection for the 
balance of risks, the mean – or ‘expected’ – path for inflation is close to, albeit just 
below, the 2% towards the end of the forecast period. 
The projection for inflation is broadly similar on the alternative assumption of a 
constant level of Bank Rate at 5.25% throughout the forecast period, as discussed in 
the Monetary Policy Report.  This illustrates that different paths for Bank Rate can 
secure a return of inflation to target.  The market curve is higher than the current 
level of Bank Rate in the coming quarters but then falls below it further out, 
averaging just under 5½% over the next three years. 


 
A lot will depend on what happens in the labour market, and to pay.  
There are signs that the labour market is loosening.  The unemployment rate rose 
slightly to 4.0% in the three months to May, and the ratio of vacancies to the number 
of unemployed job seekers – the so-called v/u ratio, an important measure of labour 
market tightness – has continued to ease, as shown in Chart 6.  But the labour 
market remains strong.  The v/u ratio is still significantly higher than before the 
pandemic.  
  
Annual private sector regular pay growth increased further, to 7.7% in the three 
months to May.  This is materially above expectations in May’s Monetary Policy 


Report, and it is notably stronger than standard models of wage growth based on 
productivity, short-term inflation expectations and tightness in the labour market 
would have predicted. 
Chart 7 shows a swathe illustrating the range of forecasts from a suite of such wage 
models maintained by Bank staff, along with the MPC’s projection for private-sector 
regular wage growth.  In the MPC’s projection, which reflects the MPC’s best 
collective judgment, wage growth is expected to ease more slowly than these 
models would predict. 
 
In a nutshell, the empirical models illustrate what might happen if wage setting will be 
based on inflation expectations that take account of the downward path of inflation 
over the near term.  But we do not have enough evidence at present to be sure that 
wages will be set in this way.   
In the MPC’s judgement, upside surprises on wage inflation suggest that it will take 
longer for second-round effects to go away than it did for them to appear in response 
to the sharp rises in the prices of many imported goods over 2021-22.  Interacting 
with a tight labour market, that is expected to have resulted in greater persistence in 
wage inflation, and with it in the cost pressures that determine price setting in the UK 
economy.  
This difference between empirical model outputs and the Committee’s best collective 
judgement – which is very clear in the Chart I just showed you – is one illustration of 
the importance of reflecting on how our processes should adapt in a world in which 
we increasingly face significant uncertainty.   
I am delighted that Ben Bernanke has agreed to lead a review into the Bank’s 
forecasting and related processes.  Dr Bernanke is a renowned and award-winning 


economist whose distinguished career makes him the ideal person to lead this 
review. 
 
The policy decision 
I will conclude with today’s policy decision.  
The news to wages and its implications for inflation persistence should be seen 
within the context of the overall data news since June.   
As we approached the June meeting, data outturns were strong across indicators of 
inflation persistence, including service price inflation and employment as well as 
wages.  The MPC responded to this evidence of more persistent inflation pressure 
by increasing Bank Rate by 0.5 percentage points at the June meeting.   
Since then, while pay growth has come in stronger than expected, other data news 
has been more mixed in terms of its implications for the persistence of inflationary 
pressures and thus the outlook for inflation over the medium term.  That is why the 
MPC has voted to increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points today. 
Given the significant increase in Bank Rate since the start of this tightening cycle, 
the stance of monetary policy is restrictive.  The evidence is now clear that it is 
having an impact.  
To return inflation to target, policy needs to continue to be restrictive.  Today we 
have taken a decision consistent with that, which will help to return inflation to target.  
I am not going to judge what the path of rates will be, not least because – as our 
Report indicates – more than one path may deliver inflation back to target 
sustainably.  We will judge what is the most appropriate based on the evidence.  
The MPC will continue to monitor closely indications of persistent inflationary 
pressures and resilience in the economy as a whole, including the tightness of labour 
market conditions and the behaviour of wage growth and services price inflation. If 
there were to be evidence of more persistent pressures, then further tightening in 
monetary policy would be required.  
The MPC will ensure that Bank Rate is sufficiently restrictive for sufficiently long to 
return inflation to the 2% target sustainably in the medium term, in line with its remit.    
 
With that, Ben, Dave and I will be happy to take your questions. 
