SOURCE: opening-remarks-february-2024.pdf
DATE: 202402
TYPE: opening
============================================================

1 
 
MONETARY POLICY REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE 
Thursday 1 February 2024 
Opening remarks by Andrew Bailey, Governor 
 
Today’s monetary policy decision 
We have had some good news over the past few months.  Inflation has fallen a long 
way, from 10% a year ago to 4% now.  Things are moving in the right direction.   
Today, we have held Bank Rate at 5.25%.   
Yes, we have had good news.  But we have to be more confident that inflation will fall 
all the way back to the 2% target – and stay there.    We are not yet at a point where 
we can lower interest rates.  The level of Bank Rate remains appropriate.  Any 
decision to change Bank Rate will depend on how the evidence evolves.   
Price stability is the foundation of a healthy economy.  We must get inflation back to 
the 2% target sustainably.  And we will. 
The outlook for inflation 
As Chart 1 shows, we expect consumer price inflation to continue to fall over the 
coming months (in the shaded area).  It may tick up slightly in January’s number 
published in two weeks’ time.  This is because of so-called base effects from volatility 
in prices like airfares.  But by the time we get to March, we think inflation will be 
around 3%.  In April, May and June we expect inflation to be close to the 2% target 
before increasing somewhat over the second half of the year.   
Inflation is coming down primarily because the global inflationary shocks have been 
abating.  The prices of traded goods and food are no longer pushing inflation up as 
they did (illustrated here by the blue and purple bars respectively).  Oil and gas 
prices have fallen significantly since November.  That pushes further down on 
headline inflation in the months ahead (as shown by the contributions from energy 
prices in the dark orange bars).  
When we raised interest rates, it was not to prevent these global shocks from 
happening – that would not work.  It was to prevent second-round effects on 
domestic prices from taking hold.  Our restrictive monetary policy stance is working 
to reduce domestic inflationary pressures.  Services price inflation, which is closely 
linked to domestic costs, has started to ease and somewhat more than we had 
expected.  But services price inflation tends to be persistent, and it remains elevated 
(illustrated in Chart 1 by the contributions in the yellow bars).   


2 
 
 
So it is not as simple as ‘inflation returns to target in the spring and job done’.   
Futures prices for oil and gas suggest that we should not expect further big falls in 
energy prices.  So looking further ahead, to the second half of year, the negative 
contributions from energy prices are likely to fade, absent any further shocks.  In and 
of itself, that will push headline inflation back up somewhat.   
Chart 2 shows just how important this energy component is when we look across the 
whole year and into 2025.  The blue line is our baseline projection for headline 
inflation over the next three years, conditional on a path for market interest rates 
implied by market yields.  The red line is a projection for inflation excluding the 
energy price contributions (shown as purple bars).  As the negative contributions 
from energy prices fade away over the second half of the year, headline inflation (in 
blue) is set to go up again somewhat, to around 2.75% by the end of 2024.   
Inflation then remains around this level throughout 2025 before gradually returning to 
target in 2026.  This means that inflation is above target for longer in this projection 
than in the November report. 
That brings me to an important point.  This projection for inflation is not an 
unconditional forecast.  The projection is the modal – or ‘most likely’ – path for 
inflation, in the best collective judgement of the MPC, conditional on a set of 
assumptions about energy prices, the exchange rate, fiscal policy and market 
interest rates.  So they include market pricing for expectations of future monetary 
policy decisions.  


3 
 
 
These conditioning paths have changed significantly since our previous projection 
from November.  The Brent spot oil price has fallen by 16%, and European gas 
futures prices for 2024 have fallen by more than 30%.  That pulls the inflation profile 
down in the near term.  At the same time, the market-implied path for Bank Rate, on 
which the projection is conditioned, has fallen by almost 1 percentage point on 
average over the next three years.  That pushes the profile for inflation up over the 
medium term. 
 
 


4 
 
As Chart 3 shows, the fall in the market path for interest rates has widened the gap 
between our baseline projection, which is conditional on that market path, and our 
alternative projection conditional on holding Bank Rate constant at its current level 
throughout the forecast horizon.  In that alternative projection, inflation is projected to 
be around the 2% target through the first half of the forecast period before falling 
below target in the second half.   
In other words, if we were to keep Bank Rate at 5.25% for the next three years, we 
think it is likely that inflation would eventually fall significantly below target.  But if we 
were to follow the market-rate conditioning path, we think inflation would be above 
target for much of the next three years.  We need to get this balance right.  We have 
to keep monetary policy sufficiently restrictive for sufficiently long.  Nothing more, 
nothing less. 
For how long will a restrictive stance be needed?  What level of Bank Rate will be 
required to deliver it?  The answers to those questions will ultimately depend on what 
the incoming data tell us about the outlook for the UK economy and inflation over the 
medium term – on whether we have enough evidence that policy is sufficiently 
restrictive to overcome persistence in inflation. 
There are always risks that can change the outlook.  Sadly, geopolitical risks have 
intensified following events in the Middle East.  There has so far been a limited 
impact on wholesale energy prices.  But shipping volumes have fallen materially on 
Red Sea routes.  And as Chart 4 shows, shipping costs have increased on routes 
from East Asia to the Mediterranean (in purple) and Northern Europe (in light blue), 
albeit not to the levels seen during the pandemic.  So far, these price increases have 
not spilled over to other routes such as from East Asia to East Coast America (in 
orange), and the impact on consumer prices has been limited.   
 
 
Chart 4 Shippin  costs ha e increase on some routes
Shipping costs on major shipping routes
 o  c   Refinitiv from  SEG  latest datapoint  1  01 24


5 
 
But that could change if trade disruptions continue.  This poses an upside risk to our 
inflation projection over the first half of the forecast period. 
The key forecast jud ements 
In its assessment of the medium-term outlook, the Monetary Policy Committee has 
been guided by three key forecast judgements.  These judgements, and the risks 
around them, are described in detail in the Monetary Policy Report.   
The first key judgement is that GDP growth is expected to pick up gradually during 
the forecast period.  Higher interest rates are weighing on GDP growth.  But with the 
fall in market rates, and because a fall in import prices is boosting real incomes, we 
expect the economy to pick up a bit more speed.  Bank staff estimate that around 
two thirds of the peak domestic impact of higher interest rates on the level of GDP 
has now come through.  That is up from about half in November. 
The second key judgement is that excess demand is turning into excess supply.  
While we expect potential supply growth to remain subdued, a modest pick-up in 
productivity and labour supply growth is sufficient for supply to outpace demand over 
the forecast period.  
The third key judgement is that second-round effects in domestic prices and wages 
will take longer to unwind than they did to emerge.  This helps explain why inflation 
remains above the 2% target in our baseline projection despite the emergence of 
excess supply.  In light of recent evidence, the MPC has slightly reduced the effect of 
this judgement on the degree of persistence in domestic prices in the forecast.  But 
inflation remains above target in the projection also because the fall in market 
interest rates, on which it is conditioned, has reduced the degree of slack that builds 
in the economy over the forecast horizon.  
 


6 
 
Labour market 
In making these key judgements, evidence on labour market developments is 
important.  
The MPC considers the collective steer from a wide range of data to inform its view 
of labour market developments.  But continued uncertainties around the official data 
are posing challenges.   
This is especially the case for the rate of unemployment, where we have fewer 
alternative indicators to draw on.  Judging by the outlook for the economy, and 
consistent with our second key judgement, we expect unemployment to rise 
somewhat further, to around 5% by the end of the forecast period, a little above our 
estimate of the medium-term equilibrium rate.   
To inform our third key judgement, on inflation persistence, the MPC also monitors 
wage developments very carefully.  
Here, we have more to go by.  And the official data are not affected by current issues 
with the ONS’s  abour Force Survey.  Annual growth in regular private sector wages 
fell to 6.5% in the three months to November.  That is around 1 percentage point 
lower than we expected in November.  As Chart 5 shows, this has brought the 
headline wage measure (in blue) in line with other indicators of annual pay growth. 
As Chart 6 shows, the MPC continues to judge that private sector wage growth will 
ease more slowly than the range of forecasts from our suite of models would predict 
– though the recent news implies that pay growth is slightly weaker than projected in 
November, reaching 3% by the end of the forecast period.  
 
 


7 
 
 
 
Combined with the news we have had on services inflation, this is consistent with our 
third key judgement that second-round effects on domestic prices will take longer to 
unwind than they did to emerge – if perhaps not quite as long as we previously 
thought.  
Monetary policy 
The Monetary Policy Committee remains prepared to adjust monetary policy as 
warranted by economic data.  It is the evidence that will drive our decisions on 
interest rates.  We will continue to monitor closely indications of persistent 
inflationary pressures.  
As we see the outlook for the economy and inflation today – based on the evidence 
we have had – we think it is most likely that this year’s questions for the MPC are  
“for how long should we keep Bank Rate at its current level?”  “have inflationary 
pressures eased enough that we can begin to lower Bank Rate or not?”  
At this policy meeting, the MPC discussed all options.  Two members of the 
Committee voted to increase Bank Rate.  One member voted to cut.  The six 
members in the majority were of the view that Bank Rate should stay at 5.25% – that 
we still need to see more evidence.  We will therefore keep under review for how 
long Bank Rate should be maintained at its current level. 
We have come a long way.  That is good news.  But we are not there yet.  
With that, Ben, Dave and I will be happy to take your questions. 
