SOURCE: opening-remarks-november-2015.pdf
DATE: 201511
TYPE: opening
============================================================

 
 
 
 
 
 
INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE 
Thursday 5th November 2015 
Opening Remarks by the Governor  
  
Remember, remember, the fifth of November. What is memorable about today’s 
Inflation Report?  
The headlines are familiar. Inflation remains close to zero. I have written another 
open letter to the Chancellor explaining why and what we intend to do about it. The 
MPC has voted again by a majority of 8-1 to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and by 9-0 
to maintain the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion. And once again, as it has 
since February of last year, we have reaffirmed our expectation that, when Bank Rate 
rises occur, they can be expected to be limited and gradual. 
More fundamentally, monetary policy must continue to balance two fundamental 
forces – domestic strength and foreign weakness – in order to return inflation to target 
in a sustainable manner. 
So, despite significant market volatility at times, developments since August have left 
our broad narrative intact. However, recent events have also highlighted some 
nuances around this story. Let me begin with the global picture, where the most 
important developments lie.   


 
2 
 
Global outlook 
The outlook for global growth has weakened since August.  Many emerging market 
economies have slowed markedly this year, and the Committee has downgraded its 
assessment of their medium-term growth prospects.  While growth in advanced 
economies has continued and broadened, particularly in the euro area, the Committee 
nonetheless expects the overall pace of UK-weighted global growth to be more 
modest than had been expected in August.   
There remain downside risks to our global outlook, including a more abrupt 
slowdown in China as authorities attempt to rebalance demand, and in emerging 
economies more broadly, given high levels of debt and vulnerability to capital 
outflows.  A crystallisation of these risks would slow UK growth – both through trade 
channels and through the effects on domestic spending of lower asset prices and 
depressed sentiment. 
Reflecting concerns about the global outlook, risky asset prices have fallen since 
August, and there have also been sizeable declines in the yields on safe assets. These 
have had opposing effects on the forecast. In part, that reflects genuinely lower 
expectations for the future path of Bank Rate. But in part it also likely reflects a 
greater preference among investors to hold safe assets, hedging the possibility of more 
extreme outcomes.  
Domestic outlook 
In contrast to the global picture, private domestic demand remains resilient, despite 
ongoing fiscal consolidation.  Consumer confidence is firm, real income growth is 


 
3 
 
expected to be the strongest since the crisis, and firms’ investment intentions remain 
robust.   
Although it has moderated recently to around trend rates, economic growth is 
projected to pick up a little towards the middle of next year as a tighter labour market 
and stronger productivity support real incomes and consumption.  Accommodative 
credit conditions are expected to encourage strong investment and a pick-up in the 
housing market.  
As usual, there are risks around the expected path for domestic activity. To the 
downside, domestic demand could grow less strongly if households and firms build 
precautionary savings in the light of greater global uncertainty. To the upside, firms’ 
investment spending could grow more quickly given the shortfall of capital spending 
during the crisis, or household consumption could grow even more rapidly given 
supportive borrowing rates. Taken together, the Committee judges the risks to 
domestic demand to be broadly balanced. 
Inflation outlook 
The outlook for inflation reflects the balance between persistent drags from factors 
such as sterling and world export prices, and prospective further increases in domestic 
cost growth. 
Those external factors are dominant in the September CPI data, in which inflation 
stood at -0.1%, slightly over two percentage points below the inflation target.  As set 
out in my letter to the Chancellor published today alongside our Report, around four-


 
4 
 
fifths of the deviation from the target reflects falls in energy, food and other imported 
goods prices, with the remainder reflecting subdued domestic cost growth.  
The combined weakness in domestic costs and imported goods prices is evident in 
subdued measures of core inflation, which at around 1%, are rising at similar rates as 
at the time of our August Report.   
A number of factors are dampening inflation. These include the effects of sterling’s 
past appreciation and foreign disinflation. The prospects for inflation reflect the 
balance of the drag from these persistent factors with prospective further increases in 
domestic cost growth.  
The unemployment rate has fallen by three percentage points since its peak, and now 
stands at around 5 0.5 per cent. Robust private domestic demand is expected to produce 
sufficient momentum to eliminate the margin of spare capacity that remains over the 
next year. Domestic cost pressures are expected to build as a result of a pick-up in 
wage growth relative to productivity growth. CPI inflation is nonetheless likely to 
remain below 1% until the second half of next year, reflecting the continuing drag 
from commodity and other imported goods prices.  
Beyond that, the dampening influence of sterling’s past appreciation on inflation is 
expected to persist, with it likely still affecting inflation in two years’ time.  A 
summary of the extensive analysis underlying this judgement is set out in today’s 
Report.  


 
5 
 
Policy outlook 
The MPC’s objective is to return inflation to target sustainably; that is, without 
overshooting the target once persistent disinflationary forces ultimately wane.  Given 
these considerations, the MPC intends to set monetary policy to ensure that growth is 
sufficient to absorb remaining spare capacity in a manner that returns inflation to the 
target in around two years – and keeps it there in the absence of further shocks. 
In the Committee’s judgement, the lower path for Bank Rate implied by market yields 
would provide more than adequate support to domestic demand to bring inflation to 
target even in the face of global weakness. Were Bank Rate to follow that very 
gradually rising path, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation would 
slightly exceed the 2% target in two years and then rise a little further above it, 
reflecting modest excess demand.  
The risks to this projection lie slightly to the downside in the first two years, reflecting 
global factors. That is consistent with a market view that may assign some risk to a 
sharper deterioration in global conditions.  
Underlying those projections are significant judgements in a number of areas, as 
described in the November Inflation Report. In any one of these areas, developments 
might easily turn out differently than assumed with implications for the outlook for 
growth and inflation, and therefore for the appropriate stance of monetary policy. 
Reflecting that, there is a range of views among MPC members about the balance of 
risks to inflation relative to the best collective judgement presented in the November 
Report.  


 
6 
 
All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the 
economy, when Bank Rate does begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually 
and to a lower level than in recent cycles. This guidance is an expectation, not a 
promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow over the next few years will depend 
on the economic circumstances.  
Finally, given the prospects for future increases in Bank Rate, today the Committee is 
giving further guidance about the future path for the stock of assets held by the Bank 
under the Asset Purchase Facility. As described in the Inflation Report, the MPC’s 
preference is to use Bank Rate as the active marginal instrument for monetary policy, 
and expects to maintain the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion until Bank Rate 
has reached a level from which it can be cut materially. The MPC currently judges 
that such a level of Bank Rate is around 2%. This further supplements the 
Committee’s forward guidance framework, which has included general guidance on 
the APF, since it was originally announced in August 2013. 
With that, we look forward to your questions. 
 
