SOURCE: press-conference-transcript-february-2015.pdf
DATE: 201502
TYPE: transcript
============================================================

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bank of England   
 
 
 
Inflation Report Q&A  
12th February 2015      


Page  2 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
Phil Aldrick, The Times: 
I just wondered about Greece, and whether a Greece - a dirty 
exit - would throw all of your forecasts off course and require 
some - what kind of response would it require, do you think? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, recognising that this is a hypothetical question, you 
know, would a change in Greece's position have an impact on 
the forecast?  Yes.  Would it have the same impact on the UK 
economy as it would have had in 2012?  No.  There are 
differences now than there were in 2012.  They include 
differences to the institutional arrangements in the euro area, 
both facilities at the level of the euro area, but obviously 
importantly facilities announced by the ECB - I'm speaking 
specifically of OMTs, and of course coupled with the 
demonstrated willingness of the ECB to use its full toolkit, as 
appropriate, to meet its remit. 
 
 
There are also differences since 2012 in terms of the track 
records of the various economies - so-called peripheral 
economies - within the eurozone.  And those differences in 
track records are certainly reflected in market yields.  You've 
seen yields on 10-year bonds of Ireland, Italy, Spain, 
Portugal, etc., tighten over the course of the last several 
months as these issues have risen up the focus of markets, at 
the same time that obviously Greek spreads have moved 
further out. 
 
 
And the third reason why things were different is that the 
scale of private sector exposure to Greece, both within the 
euro area and certainly from the UK financial system, has 
gone down.   
 
 
And on that last point, just to be clear, I mean, one of the 
advantages of the structure of the Bank is that we're 
obviously the prudential supervisor as well as the monetary 
authority.  And so we have direct line of sight into the 
exposures of our largest financial institutions to Greece.  And 
I can tell you that the level of that exposure is less than 2% 


Page  3 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
of common equity, and it has been coming down.  So I'm 
speaking specifically about the UK banking system here. 
 
 
So for all those reasons there's a different order of 
magnitude.  But it would have an impact, and we would have 
to assess that impact at the time.  And, as I said in my 
opening comments, we do have the means and the will, and 
obviously the responsibility, to take whatever action is 
necessary in any eventuality, in order to bring inflation back 
to target within a reasonable time horizon. 
 
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News: 
It's a question about your inflation projections.  So they're 
shown as above target at the end of three years, but of 
course market expectations have changed since then and are 
now looking for a Q1 rate increase.  So can you talk a little bit 
about what that does to your interest forecast - not your 
interest rate forecast - your inflation forecast?  And, you 
know, does that mean that at the end of the period they 
should be back right down at the target perhaps?  And also, 
what does that mean for what investors are now thinking?  
Are they actually now spot on? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, as you know, Jennifer, we don't do real time updating of 
our inflation forecast.  The next one's due in the middle of 
May, I think.  Yeah, we get three months to think about these 
questions, as Ben says. 
 
 
Look, I think what is safest to say is that, using the curves 
that we had at the time when we conducted the forecast, 
which is the time at which we took our policy decision, last 
week, that you did have that slight overshoot. 
 
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News: 
So what does that do to where markets ought to be right 
now?  I mean, are they wrong? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Look - markets will - I think - let me go back to something I 
said at my opening remarks, which is that what markets have 


Page  4 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
been doing since our last forecast in November is they 
adjusted their expectations around the pace and degree of 
rate increases, in an environment of some additional external 
headwinds particularly to growth.  So they adjusted them 
down, and notably so.  And I would suggest that they did that 
because the market understands in general what the MPC is 
trying to do.   
 
 
What we have with today's Report and accompanying letter is 
as much clarity as we can give about what our objective is.  
So we're being very clear that we think that we should be 
returning inflation - given the nature of the shocks that have 
hit the economy, and given that most of the shocks that have 
affected inflation have been one-off price level shocks - these 
big commodity price shocks, we've been clear that we're 
going to look through those.  And given the absence of a 
trade-off between output or employment and inflation, the 
absence of that trade-off, that we should return inflation to 
target as quickly as possible.  And our judgement is, given all 
that, within the next two years. 
 
 
The market can take that information, can take other 
developments, and make its own judgement about the exact 
pace of those.  And we won't provide a real time running 
commentary on that, except I just - I think I should 
underscore the point that what is consistent with our 
objective, our stated objective of returning inflation within the 
next two years, it is - it does require some limited and 
gradual increases in interest rates over the forecast horizon. 
 
Richard Edgar, ITV News: 
Perhaps, trying to make your comments slightly more 
concrete.  In your letter to the Chancellor, you refer to falling 
prices and the action that you could take if deflation were to 
set in.  Should borrowers and savers be preparing then for a 
rate cut, as we've seen today in Sweden, or a rate rise? 
 


Page  5 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, I think it's pretty clear, in terms of our central 
expectation, that the most likely next move in monetary 
policy is an increase in interest rates.  As we've been saying 
for some time, we expect those adjustments to be limited and 
at a gradual pace, but the message is clear: in order to 
achieve our objective, we're going to look through this one-
time adjustment - which in the end is good news, by and 
large, for British households, recognising there are some 
distributional impacts across the United Kingdom, but it's 
good news for British households. 
 
 
And we're going to look through that and ensure that inflation 
comes back to target in a timely fashion.  But that is 
consistent with some rate increases over the forecast horizon, 
in our judgement. 
 
Estelle Shirbon, Reuters News: 
The pound hit its highest level against the euro in seven years 
on Wednesday.  I was wondering how much of a concern that 
is for the Bank. 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, speaking from an inflation perspective, one of the drags 
on inflation at present has been the impact of past 
depreciation of sterling, not just against the Euro but against 
a host of other currencies - Yen and others - particularly 
emerging market currencies.   
 
 
We're seeing that pass through also help dampen inflation.  
It's not the most important factor, but it's also helping 
dampen inflation right now.  So it's something that we do 
monitor.  But, as I said before, our judgement is that, given 
all those factors, given the shocks that have hit the UK at 
present, we can chart a course which delivers inflation back 
to target within an appropriate horizon. 
 
Robert Peston, BBC: 
Good morning, Governor.  You say that the months you 
expect of zero inflation and the probability that it'll turn 
negative is basically a good thing, that it reflects oil price 


Page  6 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
cuts, food price falls that are putting money into people's 
pockets - spending power, augmented spending power for 
shoppers.  How would you know, how would you judge, 
however, that good price falls were turning into bad 
deflation?  And if you were to judge that good price falls were 
turning into pernicious deflation, what would you then do 
about it? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Right.  Well, it's an important question, and we would 
distinguish what's happening at present and what's likely to 
happen over the course of the year from a - as you say - a 
bad deflation outcome.  This is - we've had a dramatic change 
in a series of commodity prices, most notable oil - the biggest 
move - the third biggest move in the last half-century.  And 
that's flowing through to the petrol pump. 
 
 
That is different than persistent and widespread falls in 
prices.  So one of the things that we look at, and will continue 
to look at, is all the components of the CPI - which of them 
are falling?  What is it relative to historic averages? 
 
 
And in the letter, actually, we draw attention to this.  It's - I 
think the figure precisely is about 68% of the components are 
rising - the components of CPI are rising.    
 
Robert Peston, BBC: 
[inaudible] 
 
Mark Carney: 
But they are rising, because obviously oil and food are rising - 
I'm giving you the components that are actually increasing 
within the CPI. That's bang on historic averages.  So in other 
words, we're seeing more concentrated falls in prices.  So 
there's nothing particularly unusual about the breadth of the 
change in prices.  And that's very important.  So the first 
element of your question is - what are we going to look at?  
Well, we'll continue to look at the breadth of changes in 
prices; look at the persistence there, but obviously monitor 
inflation expectations very closely.  And we do; as detailed in 


Page  7 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
the Report, inflation expectations are consistent with the 2% 
target.  We list all the ones that we look at - more than half 
are in line with historic averages, but again, we will watch 
that - watch that closely.  We'll also watch developments on 
the wage front as well, to the extent that wage patterns start 
to be affected. 
 
 
I think the important point, which is entirely from a 
contingency or risk management perspective, is to 
underscore that, if we were in a situation (which we are not in 
at the moment), but if we ever were in a situation where we 
needed to provide additional stimulus, we have many options 
- we have many options to provide that stimulus, and the 
effectiveness of the stimulus is reinforced by the relative 
health of the financial system as well. 
 
 
But just to bring it back to where we are today, we see these 
one-off changes in prices.  Good news.  Helps support real 
incomes - we expect the strongest real income growth in over 
a decade actually.  And as a consequence of that and other 
factors, our view is that the most likely moves on monetary 
policy are rate increases. 
 
Bill Keegan, Observer: 
I wondered, Governor, whether you've had any reaction from 
Berlin, Brussels or Frankfurt to the points you made in your 
Dublin speech about the fiscal deficiencies of the eurozone? 
 
Mark Carney: 
The issues in that speech - the true answer is yes - and the 
issues in that speech around - let me generalise it first and I'll 
get to the specifics, which is the importance of building 
greater private and public risk sharing in the eurozone.  So 
banking union, capital markets union, absolutely essential, 
but also some element of public risk sharing related to fiscal 
arrangements, just as we have here in the United Kingdom - 
as virtually any currency union has.  
 


Page  8 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
 
Those issues have been discussed in the past.  Those issues 
were publicly aired in the report of the four presidents a few 
years ago.  And I have had discussions with my counterparts 
both prior to the speech and subsequent to the speech, both 
in central banks and ministries, on these issues. 
 
 
These are medium term issues; they're not conjunctural 
issues - it's not about short-term stance of policy, but it's 
about structuring a viable currency union.  I mean, I will say - 
and if I can bring this back to - and I would say there's a 
much more general recognition of these issues than one 
might expect. 
 
 
If I can bring it back the UK.  Again, speaking from a 
structural perspective, one of the reasons why the fall in oil 
prices is unambiguously good for the UK economy, even 
though there are distributional consequences - there's 
impacts in Aberdeen, there's impacts in a series of businesses 
that support the energy sector - is because we have longer-
term fiscal arrangements.  And those structural fiscal 
arrangements have the impact - and it's referenced in the 
Dublin speech - that the impact on fiscal capacity in Scotland, 
for example, is only one tenth of what it would have been in 
their absence. 
 
 
And that's one way that the benefits of lower oil are recycled 
through this economy, which helps smooth the adjustment. 
 
Inaudible question 
 
Mark Carney: 
The issues are well appreciated, I would say.  No, I mean, I 
think it's an issue in terms of understanding the economics of 
the issue.  The question is the timeline and the mechanics of 
addressing it. 
 
Larry Elliott, the Guardian: 
One thing that recent history has told us is that the Bank's 
forecasts are unlikely to pan out exactly the way you expect 


Page  9 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
them to.  And you say that the risks around them are broadly 
balanced.  I just wondered whether you could explore that a 
bit more, because one option here - one risk - would be that 
we have something similar to what happened after the 
1985/86 fall in oil prices, that there was a very big increase in 
consumption in the UK.  Low borrowing costs set off much 
higher growth than people imagined.  That's one risk. 
 
 
The other risk is that the dynamics that have kept inflation 
falling, the underlying reasons for it - low wage increases, lots 
of slack in the labour market - that that continues, which has 
really been the more recent history, that throughout the last 
two or three years expectations of when Bank Rate will rise 
have been pushed further and further backwards. 
 
 
So I just wonder - do you really think those risks are equally 
balanced or do you have a hunch which way it's more likely to 
turn out?  Are we likely to see much stronger levels of activity 
and higher inflation, as it was in the mid to late 1980s, or are 
we likely to see a continuation of what we've seen in the 
more recent past? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Let me say a couple of words, then I'm going to pass to Ben 
to give his perspective on it. 
 
 
I think the thing that we have seen in recent months is the 
start of the turn of wages, and consistent with the change in 
slack in the labour market.  So we've seen the start of that.  
Now I wouldn't over-play that; it's still relatively early days, 
and actually I might take an opportunity just to point out that 
we think there are going to be some base effects that impact 
the average weekly earnings numbers in the course of the 
next couple of months.  So we may see sequentially a little 
slowing in that, but on an annual basis we still see - we still 
expect to see a pick-up. 
 


Page  10 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
 
That provides some balance to that downside risk.  That’s the 
first point I'd like to make.  The second is that what's 
important is that it's recognised that we will fulfil our 
responsibilities, by which I mean we're going to have a period 
where headline inflation is low - very low - for most of this 
year, and that's a good thing in general because of the 
causes of it.  It's not a good thing if it persists, though, 
because a little bit of inflation greases the wheels of the 
economy, as you know.  And so the recognition that we're 
going to be responsible in the calibration of policy, so that 
inflation comes back to target.  But that feeds into 
expectations of employers and of workers in setting wages 
and in planning investments. 
 
 
But I might ask Ben to say a bit broader about how we 
construct risks and how we think about this. 
 
Ben Broadbent: 
Thanks.  Well you're right to highlight the risks and that's 
why we have Fan Charts and not just point forecasts and we 
continually make an effort to remind people of that.  And you 
can judge from the width of those the sort of scale of the 
risks we're talking about. 
 
 
One thing I would say though, with reference to your 
comparison with the 1980s, is that of course the policy 
regime, and specifically the monetary policy regime is very, 
very different.  And throughout that era, throughout the '70s, 
and the '80s actually, inflation was far more volatile than it is 
now.  I mean, if we'd drawn a Fan Chart then without an 
inflation target I think it would have been a lot wider.   
 
 
Now that improvement was flattered probably by the years of 
the great stability.  My predecessor predicted at the beginning 
of - when the Bank was first granted independence over 
monetary policy that we'd be writing a letter 40% of the time.  
So things got even better than that, probably not for reasons, 
or at least solely for reasons to do with the improvement in 


Page  11 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
monetary policy.  But I don't think that the '80s are a 
relevant comparison for the sort of scale of the risks to 
inflation we're talking about. 
 
Chris Giles, Financial Times: 
It's a question either for the Governor or maybe Minouche.  
Interest rate futures markets have moved very, very rapidly 
in the last few days from a position far away from the 
Inflation Report, to one which is almost entirely in line with 
the Inflation Report.  Are you worried that you might have 
had some data security breaches of this Inflation Report such 
that the forecast might have leaked out to the markets and 
what might you do about that? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well I can take that, I have absolutely no reason to have 
those worries.  There's been adjustments - there's always 
adjustments in markets in terms of expectations of stance of 
policy.  And one of the things, as you know, Chris, is that our 
future, our forward OIS curve, is quite flat and so relatively 
modest moves can translate into relatively large moves in 
calendar space.  So you can move easily from the fall of 2016 
to the spring of 2016 with relatively small moves.   
 
 
But look, no, we have - you know you have the joy of being 
locked up here when we release various documents.  We 
have very robust security procedures and I have absolutely 
no reason to credit that concern. 
 
Helia Ebrahimi, CNBC: 
A bit more on wages, do you think it's irrelevant now to call 
for companies to raise people's wages, given you're 
forecasting that household incomes rates grow at their fastest 
pace in a decade, or is there a real risk still of deflationary 
pressures becoming entrenched until we see real wage rises? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well I think - this is a risk we're looking to guard against.  
And I think I would say that this is a strength of this system 
is that, given how low inflation, is there's a need to write a 
letter to explain why that's there and what we're going to do 


Page  12 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
about it, and provide as much clarity as possible.  And that 
should help inform wage setting.  And you know - and I think 
the message is we're quite comfortable in giving message of 
our ability to bring inflation back to target in a timely fashion.   
 
 
In terms of the dynamics of the labour market, it continues to 
tighten broadly as we had expected, so slack has - our 
estimate of slack has come down to the region of a half a 
percent.  We are seeing, as I referenced earlier, and we 
reference in the Report, tangible increases in wages.  It's still 
relatively early days.  The survey measures support that as 
well; our agent discussions support that as well.  And by 
having an opportunity to make clear that there is a good 
element to these falls in prices, the falls in commodity prices, 
and that that will reinforce, in our expectation, consumer 
spending.  That should help support a well-functioning labour 
market.  So we're not making an appeal to companies in 
order to do something, we're just observing what we expect 
is most likely to happen. 
 
David Smith, Sunday Times: 
It's a very similar point, but I noticed in the last MPC minutes 
there was a concern that pay settlements would follow 
inflation down and you'll be watching that closely. 
 
Mark Carney: 
Yes. 
 
David Smith, Sunday Times: 
In this Report you've revised up your predictions for average 
earnings growth, which presumably is on a basis of 
unemployment coming down more quickly.  But that's still 
alongside fairly weak productivity growth, certainly for this 
year and not particularly strong in future years.  Do you think 
that's a rather bold forecast on earnings growth, given where 
we are now and where we've been in the last few years? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Yeah, well - I'll invite Ben to amplify, but I think we're quite 
comfortable with the central expectation of that forecast 
given the tightening in the labour market.  As you know, the 


Page  13 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
dynamics of consumer spending are reinforced obviously by 
the improvement in real incomes that comes from the 
changes - the temporary changes in prices.  And that we are 
conscious of the risk that there could be persistence in lower 
wages, you know, just this long period of relatively weak 
earnings growth could have an element of persistence which 
could delay this adjustment, and that's one of the downside 
risks.   
 
 
And to be clear again, to map the risks, and then I will ask 
Ben to amplify.  In our famous Fan Chart of the inflation 
forecast we do have a slight skew in the next year - downside 
skew in the next year - just because of the possibility that 
there could be a little more persistence once prices are low, 
that it could just extend for a little longer.  But we think that 
comes away within the two-year horizon. 
 
Ben Broadbent: 
The only thing I'd add is just to highlight the importance of, 
as you have yourself, of the productivity growth forecast on 
which all this depends.  We wouldn't view that in the longer-
term comparison as unduly optimistic.  We have it improving, 
but we have that rate of growth only just getting back, by the 
end of the forecast, to the average of the pre-crisis growth 
rates. 
 
 
So yes, it's faster than we've seen in the three or four years 
since the crisis and therefore earnings growth is also faster.  
But I think, viewed on the long term perspective, I wouldn't 
say it's overly optimistic. 
 
Ben Chu, The Independent: 
Governor, a question about the risks posed by household 
balance sheets.  Other forecasters, not least the Office for 
Budget Responsibility, have projected a very large increase in 
the level of household leverage and a sharp decline in the 
savings ratio.  I'm just wondering what your view is of those 
developments.  Do they pose a risk that people become 
overleveraged?  You do project an increase in consumer 


Page  14 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
spending; how worried are you about unsecured lending, etc., 
increasing? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, I think I would speak more broadly for the Bank, 
including the FPC, that we continue to monitor quite closely 
developments in household balance sheets.  And we view, 
you know, when we viewed the risks around the housing 
market it was through the lens of household balance sheets in 
the medium term as being the biggest medium-term risk to 
the UK economy, and that remains the case. 
 
 
I would observe though that there has been improvement in 
household balance sheets.  British households have paid 
down about 20 percentage points of debt to income.  That 
ratio is still above its longer-term average, but it has been 
coming down.  The savings - because of the growth in wages, 
the combination of growth in wages and lower inflation in the 
near term, actually, even though we have a fairly robust 
outlook for consumption, the savings rate holds up in this 
forecast.  So this is not a debt-fuelled expansion in our 
forecast; it is something we watch.  
 
 
I'd make a last point which is a general one, which is that the 
UK as a whole, while it was quite over-levered obviously into 
the crisis, the UK as a whole - the private non-financial 
sector, so households and corporates have actually been one 
of the only sectors that have - internationally - that have de-
levered and the combination of the two has been in the order 
of 30 percentage points of GDP.  So there's been a fairly 
notable deleveraging; so there's progress there.  But the 
motivation for your question is still spot on; we do see these 
issues across the Bank as the most important over the 
medium term. 
 
Louise Cooper, Freelance: 
I also want to ask about inflation.  If you look at the scale of 
your cuts to the inflation forecast, it's really been quite 
dramatic.  On the outside chance on your Fan Charts, you do 


Page  15 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
predict potentially a minus 2% inflation figure on Chart 5.13, 
Page 49.  And also on Page 33 there's a Chart A, the impact 
of a fall in oil prices on inflation will be short-lived, but that 
assumes a 10% fall in oil prices.  Actually what oil prices have 
done, as we all know, they've halved and the scale and the 
size of that fall has been almost unprecedented.  What are 
your forecasts for the oil price going forward and how does 
that feed into your inflation forecasts? 
 
Mark Carney: 
The first thing is that yeah, there's a large move relative to 
November.  Four fifths of that move, relative to November, is 
accounting for the fall in the oil price between when we did 
the November Report and when we did this Report.  I'll just 
remind - I think you know this, Louise, but this Report gets 
locked down when we make the decision, which was last 
week, and oil prices at the time of that decision.  So from a 
spot perspective - and we use spot oil and then we use the 
futures curve, because it's a neutral assumption.  It's not a 
fantastic predictor of future oil prices; the spot is arguably the 
best, but we're not going to get into the business of 
forecasting the oil price.  So we use the futures curve. 
 
 
That futures curve, for what it's worth, and it's going to keep 
moving around I'm sure, but that futures curve since last 
week and today has moved up fairly substantially.  And so if 
we were to use today's futures curve as opposed to then, you 
would see that Fan coming up.   
 
 
We did the rule - you know gave some sensitivities in terms 
of the impact of change in the oil price on UK growth, so that 
people can do their own analysis around it and the immediate 
pass-through to inflation because oil is going to move around.  
And because oil is going to move around, I think it just 
reinforces the point - if I can make a policy point - it 
reinforces the point that we're not going to swing around 
monetary policy to try to chase oil, not just because it's 


Page  16 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
volatile, but also because the lags on monetary policy are 
such that it would not have the effect that we intended. 
 
Louise Cooper, Freelance: 
But how much of a risk do you think a lower oil price poses to 
your inflation forecasts? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well I think the - I wouldn't put it in the - in terms of the 
actual inflation outcome, it will be affected by big swings in 
crude prices.  You know, if we have another 50% swing in 
crude prices, yeah, that will have a notable impact on the 
inflation forecast.   
 
 
The issue, the fundamental issue in terms of the functioning 
of the economy is - does that generalise, does that pass 
through to broader prices?  Does that pass through to 
people's expectations of inflation?  And again, I'm slightly 
repeating myself, but the advantage of the system that is 
here is that we have opportunities, not just through the 
Inflation Report, but also through the letter writing process, 
to explain why inflation has moved, what we're going to do 
about it, and over what time horizon, so that people's 
expectations can be informed by that. 
 
Richard Barley,  
Wall Street Journal:  
Governor, a number of central banks have cut rates into 
negative territory, Sweden most recently this morning, and 
bond yields are negative in a number of European markets.  
The Bank highlights that, were it necessary, it now thinks it 
could cut rates from 0.5.  Has the concept of a lower bound 
for rates been scrapped?  And what are the risks around 
these unusual negative rates and negative yields? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well I think - thank you for the question.  I think the different 
countries, different jurisdictions, have different financial 
systems, different arrangements and therefore will have 
different concepts of the lower bound.  And I'm going to ask 
Minouche to add to this. 


Page  17 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
 
 
The relevant factors in the UK and the sort of limiting factor 
in the UK had been previously the relative strength of the 
banking system and the building societies, the capital position 
of those.  And given the asset liability mix of those 
institutions, what impact would an even lower Bank Rate than 
50 basis points have on their ability to rebuild capital? 
 
 
Now as you know, we've made a lot of progress, and those 
institutions have made a lot of progress in rebuilding capital.  
So because we had to write the letter, because we had to 
explain all the contingencies and the various risks in the 
context of the letter, and because just naturally we 
continually update our thinking on what we could do if we 
have to ease, whether it's on the asset purchase side, or with 
respect to Bank Rate, we provided an updated view on that. 
 
 
I'm going to ask Minouche to say a word on market 
functioning, but I will say just a general point which is, there 
is still a lower bound in these other jurisdictions; it's a 
question of exactly where it is, and they're taking an 
assessment.  At some point holding cash makes sense 
relative to using the system, but I don't know if you want to 
talk about … 
 
Minouche Shafik: 
I think as the Governor said there are two main risks of going 
negative.  One is the risk of people reverting to cash - both 
financial institutions and households - and also the worry 
about what happens to money markets when rates are 
negative.  So there's a little bit of a time limit as to how long, 
we don't know how long until it becomes desirable for people 
to go into cash.  But I think, as the Governor said earlier, 
we're not there yet, so we have the advantage of observing 
what happens in those several countries now that have 
negative interest rates, to see what the consequences are for 
those two issues. 
 


Page  18 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
        
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk: 
Just a question really on central banks and getting the 
message across.  Do you believe central bank credibility 
should be sacrificed for monetary policy goals?  I refer to the 
Swiss National Bank and their recent moves last month - and 
how you balance the two: your monetary policy goals and 
credibility after, you know, what we saw in the "black swan" 
event there? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well I think, and all colleagues would agree, that our 
credibility is essential to consistently meet monetary policy 
goals.  And the way we can most effectively reinforce that 
credibility - and it’s a constant task to continue to reinforce 
and add to that credibility - the way we can best do that is to 
be clear about exactly what we’re trying to accomplish.  
Again, that’s the advantage of this process.  It’s not just the 
2% inflation target but it’s over what horizon, given the 
shocks that are hitting the economy, and how we’re going to 
go about achieving that.   
 
 
And then, amongst many other things, providing as 
transparent and complete analysis as possible and finally 
answering questions around that, both from you, from market 
participants, from businesses and from households, to explain 
that.   
 
 
And the last element which I would add is something that 
we’ve been trying to do at the Bank, and this is based on 
recommendations of Stockton and others, but is to go back 
and assess where our forecasts have turned out to be wrong 
or not consistent with what actually transpired, why that was 
the case, why those errors were there, and if there are any 
broader lessons to be learnt from that. 
 
Jenny Scott: 
Sorry, we’ve got quite a few other people to get through.  
Hugo. 
 


Page  19 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail: 
Governor, how concerned are you and the MPC about the 
balance of the recovery?  You've obviously raised your 
household consumption forecasts but trimmed export 
forecasts and cut quite heavily your business investment 
forecasts.  And on the latter, how concerned are you about 
uncertainty surrounding the general election, British politics, 
this year on business investment and possibly the wider 
economy? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Right, start with the general concerns about the balance of 
the recovery.  It is not having an impact at this stage on the 
stance of monetary policy.  It is something we discuss, 
something we track.  There is - our consumption forecast is 
obviously supported, as I've said, both by our outlook for 
wages but also the dividend, if you will, in the short term 
from lower energy prices. 
 
 
In terms of the investment forecast, I'll make a specific point 
and then general.  Near term investment, most of the 
adjustment to near term investment is because of lower 
expected investment in the North Sea, so it’s notable and you 
picked it up.  And it’s not an adjustment because of change in 
broad investment intentions, which gets to the last bit of your 
question which is around uncertainty, whether it’s 
geopolitical, European or domestic.  We, like our agents, our 
discussions are picking up elements of domestic uncertainty, 
as are the CBI surveys, as are the British Chamber of 
Commerce surveys as well.  What we haven’t seen is that yet 
being translated into changes in investment plans, and we 
certainly haven’t seen it affecting actual investment in real 
time.  So the forward investment intentions are at this stage 
holding out even though there has been a pickup in 
observation about uncertainty in general, including domestic 
elements of it. 
 
Henry Curr, The Economist: 
Does the case for looking through the effects of the oil price 
fall hinge on the fact that that’s unanticipated or that it’s 


Page  20 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
external?  Let’s say that the futures curve did show an oil 
price change which you were able to offset because it was 
sufficiently far in the future, would you happily steer domestic 
demand to offset that or is it domestic inflationary pressure 
that you really care about? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Yeah, if only the future curve were that good a predictor.  But 
let me take your hypothetical up a level, if I may, which is 
that if we could foresee some sort of persistent disinflationary 
or deflationary force that we had quite a high probability that 
that was going to keep us off target, all other things being 
equal, and that that were going to persist you know beyond 
the usual horizon of two years, three years and beyond.  And 
an example of that might have been the impact of, you know, 
Chinese - I’ll simplify it to Chinese manufacturing at the turn 
of the millennium - one could have foreseen that.  Given our 
remit, given our mandate, should we lean against that in 
order to achieve the inflation target?  Yes is the short answer, 
given that we have operational independence, a clear remit, 
we would have to explain why we’re doing that and make it 
transparent.   
 
 
In a world where that is a positive supply shock, it’s good 
disinflation.  One might want to have a conversation about 
whether or not that should be kept.  Now I'm getting into the 
hypothetical of the hypothetical, so I should probably just 
stop.  But it’s going to be a pretty unique circumstance where 
one can have a central bank or even The Economist can have 
the confidence that there is this force that has that impact 
and it’s likely to persist as opposed to being just a shock, so 
it’s enduring.  But again, to repeat myself, the short answer, 
given the remit, is if we knew it and we could lean against it, 
we would. 
 
Mike Bird, Business Insider: 
I'm just looking at chart 1.1 as well, the forward rates 
internationally.  One of the interesting things is the fairly 
sharp change in the intersection between the US and UK 


Page  21 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
curves.  I think if you go back to about summer last year, 
people were certainly expecting a Bank Rate hike before and 
the market is now implying a sort of July or so hike from the 
Fed, a lot longer from the UK.  Obviously I won’t ask you to 
comment on the Fed’s reaction function, but how would you 
characterise the differences in the recovery and inflation 
prospects between the UK and the US? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well the expansion in the US, say generally, the expansion in 
the US is more developed; it’s been going on longer than it 
has been in the UK.  We’ve had quite different labour market 
dynamics.  The US had a sharp fall in participation; it’s now 
starting to come back, whereas we’ve had the opposite.  
We’ve had - I think we’d characterise it as a positive labour 
supply shock; there's been more workers coming into the 
market, and that’s had implications for the path of wages 
here. 
 
 
 
In terms of the inflation dynamics, we have - as a 
consequence of the differences in the labour market, there 
have been some distinctions in - there are differences, I 
mean there are basically differences in the net inflation 
dynamics.  I know you’re not suggesting this but just to avoid 
any doubt, we’re not in a situation where we’re so tightly 
bound to the US economy, or we would take so much 
information from what happens in the US economy, that 
monetary policy in the UK would move either in lock step or 
follow closely behind that in the US.  And I don’t think - make 
a market comment - I don’t think that there's confusion about 
that in the market.  I think we’ve seen our curve move by 
and large - by and large - consistent with the forces that are 
operating here. 
 
Ian King, Sky News: 
You talk in the Report about the fact that labour force - the 
labour participation rate has been lower than expected in 
recent months.  To what do you put that down?  And what 
are the implications for you if that continues with regard to 


Page  22 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
what the Prime Minister was saying the other day about 
wanting Britain to have a pay rise? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, let me say one general - let me make a general point 
and then I’ll ask Ben to speak about the specifics of it.  Which 
is that one of the things that the MPC has been discussing has 
been how to update our thinking around potential growth, 
components on the labour side or with respect to 
productivity.  And of course we get information about both of 
those on a daily basis and there's a temptation to make 
adjustments in every report. 
 
 
I think what we’re minded to do - and we’ll probably start 
doing this in May - is to set out episodically or periodically 
update on it, not episodically, periodically update our views - 
so in terms of the so-called equilibrium variables.  I'm sorry 
this is a tacky answer, you don’t want that, but Ben will give 
you a real answer.  So whether it’s around participation rate -  
your question, or around the natural rate of unemployment or 
the amount of average hours reported.  And so we take stock 
and we’re clear and then we hold those for a while.   
 
 
What we’ve been seeing is that actual participation has come 
out lower, first than we would have necessarily expected, but 
a gap has opened up between what we think is a sort of 
equilibrium level of participation and what we’re actually 
observing. 
 
Ben Broadbent: 
The only thing I’d add is - if you look at the numbers and 
they’re in Chart 3.5 which is on page 25, you can see that in 
the short term they’re pretty volatile.  The broad judgement 
we’ve made, which I think is the right one, is that quite a bit 
of the decline in this we saw, particularly when we went into 
recession in 2008/9, was cyclical, which is to say that a lot of 
the people who lost their jobs rather than looking for work 
and being counted as unemployed, instead sort of dropped 


Page  23 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
out of the labour force but that they would be able to come 
back relatively easily.   
 
 
And that basically remains our judgement.  And indeed as the 
economy has recovered you've seen, except for this dip in the 
last three months, a revival in productivity growth.  So that’s 
broadly still the judgement we’re making and it’s one of the 
sources therefore in the forecast of potential supply growth 
and employment growth over the next two to three years. 
 
Duncan Weldon, Newsnight: 
The current account deficit is currently near a record level, 
about 6% of GDP, and over your forecast period you say that 
gradually improves but the deficit remains wide.  And that 
sounds more pessimistic than the OBR’s forecast who see 
quite a rapid improvement in elements of the current 
account.  You say in the Key Judgements - the magnitude of 
the current account deficit suggests some risk to the 
sustainability of the growth outlook.  So it’s a two-part 
question, how big a risk and over what time period will you 
be watching that risk? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well you’re right; the current account deficit is let’s say at a 
record level.  I mean it’s been bouncing around a bit, but at 
6% of GDP it’s at a record level.  I think the first thing is to 
look at why has it deteriorated, why has it shifted.  And the 
answer is not in the trade balance, it’s not actually in the 
relative performance of exports and imports - both have been 
growing less rapidly than expected, but in terms of balance it 
hasn’t moved so much.  The big news has been in the swing 
in our net investment income, and quite a substantial swing.  
And it counts for the lion’s share of the shift in the current 
account. 
 
 
Now why is that the case?  Well you'd look at the big areas 
where British investments are.  Top of the list is in the euro 
area, so much lower returns on - and these are real 
investments, so lower returns on real investment in Europe.  


Page  24 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
And that could persist for some time, so this issue could 
persist for some time.   
 
 
When you run a current account deficit, you’re relying on 
foreign inflows of capital.  So it matters how you finance it in 
terms of the sustainability, and that depends on the relative 
attractiveness of a country, as ultimately it depends on the 
relative attractiveness of investments in a country. 
 
 
At present the relative growth prospects in the UK are near 
the head of the pack in the advanced economies, and with 
our forecasts and the IMF's forecasts - you could take an 
independent one - that’s likely to continue.  So that makes it 
attractive.  But also the UK is an attractive destination for 
foreign direct investment; it gets the lion's share - a 
disproportionate large share, I should say - of foreign direct 
investment for countries in the European Union.  And so it 
underscores the importance of continuing to remain an 
attractive destination for investment. 
 
 
We have looked, the last point I’ll make on this, Duncan, is 
that we have looked not as the MPC but as the FPC, we have 
looked at what could happen, what could be the implications 
of a sharper adjustment in the current account.  What if we 
no longer could rely on the kindness of strangers, if you will.  
And that was the motivation for the stress test we ran and 
the results were released in December.  And it’s a 
hypothetical scenario, but it is one that connects the dots 
from a tightening current account position to the implications 
for growth for in that case house prices, bank balance sheets.   
 
 
And the punch line on that wasn’t a great scenario, it 
wouldn’t have been a fun thing to live through; it was an 
extreme scenario and it was a stress scenario.  But the punch 
line on that was that our determination was that the core of 
the system, the core of the banking system, was resilient to 


Page  25 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
that form of shock and still would have been able to provide 
lending to the UK economy. 
 
Jenny Scott: 
Okay, last question. 
 
Nathalie Webb, Share Radio: 
Because you say that housing investment and mortgage 
approvals are down, they’re weaker than expected, do you 
see any sort of changes to try and encourage the banks to 
lend a bit more because also people have got more 
disposable income to create a bit more stimulus in that area? 
 
Mark Carney: 
No, I would say the - you know we have our, from a 
monetary policy perspective, we have our forecast of housing 
activity; it is lower than it had been previously.  From a 
broader perspective, broader Bank of England perspective, 
whether it’s the PRA or the FPC, our focus has been to ensure 
that bank underwriting standards remain responsible.  We’re 
not looking to encourage a shift towards - you would say it’s 
a surprise - we’re not looking to encourage a shift towards 
irresponsibility or so-called reckless lending.  That was the 
motivation of the steps that the FPC took in the spring of last 
year to limit the amount of high loan to income mortgages 
that could be written, and that remains the case. 
 
 
By taking those steps, and I’ll end with this on monetary 
policy, by taking those steps, by reducing risks, financial 
stability risks that could arise from irresponsible lending in 
the housing market, risks that go back to the question about 
debt, Ben’s question about debt.  The FPC preserves room for 
the MPC to conduct monetary policy to provide the 
appropriate amount of stimulus in order to get inflation back 
to target.  Because if the FPC weren’t doing its job as the first 
line of defence, then the MPC would have to potentially take 
these considerations into account, which would be difficult at 
the current juncture.  Thank you. 
 
Jenny Scott: 
Thanks very much everyone. 


Page  26 
Inflation Report Q&A - 12.2.15      
 
 
  
END 
 
