SOURCE: mpr-press-conference-transcript-february-2022.pdf
DATE: 202202
TYPE: transcript
============================================================

Monetary Policy Report Press Conference 
Thursday 3 February 2022 
Faisal Islam, BBC: Thanks, Governor. Are you saying that you can start to see the 
beginnings of a wage price spiral and how do you communicate that to UK households given 
the not unique nature but the special nature of the situation that we're in, the terms of trade 
shock that you talked about, to communicate to households that because their energy bills 
have pushed up inflation, their mortgage bills might also go up? That's a tricky one. Why 
don't you have a go at explaining that?  
 
Andrew Bailey: It is tricky, Faisal. Let me say that I'm most decidedly not going to use the 
phrase 'wage price spiral'. We're not in the territory of that phrase, in my view. What we are 
saying, and you may have observed I referred a number of times to the survey that our 
regional agents have done actually very contemporaneously, they finished it literally only a 
week or two ago, is that we are seeing upward movement in what firms expect to be wage 
settlements. After adjusting for all the sort of various COVID related effects on the data, I 
think the underlying rate of wage growth is somewhat higher than we would expect it to be at 
this point in the cycle. That's something we've observed before but coming onto the main 
thrust of your question, I mean, you're correct that of course this is a difficult situation. You 
know, we are we all hope coming out of the COVID period. There is good news in that that 
the economy has broadly recovered its pre-COVID level of output. I think another very good 
piece of news is that, you know, let's put our hand up, I think all of us, you know, thought 
unemployment would be higher than it actually has been and is, and that is very good news. 
I'll finish by saying and this is a hard message, I know, that we are facing a squeeze on real 
incomes this year because we've got this combination of high inflation at the terms of trade 
shock, as I said, the effect of imported prices. We do think that will start to slow demand and 
it is necessary for us to raise interest, to raise bank rates and therefore to raise interest rates 
because if we don't do that we think that the effects will be worse because this risk that we 
get more what I call domestic price pressures coming in, which is in the sense my way of 
turning round your wage cost spiral point, will get more enhanced. Ben, did you want to 
comment on that?  
 
Ben Broadbent: Yes, only that, I mean, in our view the main reason for wage growth 
picking up is actually just the type of labour market, which we've been seeing for a while and 
we've been seeing the signs and surveys of slightly firmer pay growth for quite a while. It is 
probable that some of it is a response to the rise in inflation we've seen but in that same agent 
survey there are many other factors and it's certainly not the main one. The main answer that 
firms give is there's just difficulty in recruiting staff.  
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: Thanks, Governor. One of the striking numbers in your latest 
forecast is you are talking about the biggest fall in real post-tax labour income that we have 
ever seen, at least since 1990 so bigger than we saw after the Financial Crisis, bigger than 


after Black Wednesday. What does that mean in practice for households around the country 
who will be looking at their bills trying to work out what they face in the next few months?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well, I think Ben may want to come in on this question about the record of 
labour income.  
 
Ben Broadbent: Yes, it's a bit fiddly. It depends on whether you use an actual year or only a 
calendar year because I just literally I bought in my iPhone so I can get the numbers.  
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: It is big.  
 
Ben Broadbent: No, it's undoubtedly big. I'm just saying it was actually bigger over a single 
four-quarter period in 2011, so if you only take calendar years then yes.  
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: That was one of the biggest squeezes that we had since Napoleonic 
times and this-,  
 
Ben Broadbent: Well, no but-,  
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: Depending on how you measure.  
 
Ben Broadbent: Yes. Look, there's no doubt, we can quibble over the data, this is an 
extremely large rise in cost of living thanks to the big jump in import prices that Andrew was 
talking about but, I mean, I was just making the point about, you know, comparing like with 
like.  
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: That was the point about, you know, this feels like a very tough 
time for households looking at their bills at the moment and trying to ponder how they're 
going to deal with it.  
 
Andrew Bailey: Yes and what I would say is, I mean, I think if you look at the forecast in the 
report and the commentary, we've got really in a sense two halves to it. You know, we've got 
obviously we go into this with a strong labour market, frankly, with the same sort of response 
to Faisal, you know, quite strong growth in earnings. Unfortunately, we've got a squeeze 
from energy prices and I've seen the Ofgem announcement this morning and in order to 
counter the threat and the risk that we see of further pressure coming from the labour market, 
I'm afraid we do have to raise the bank rates and that will, you're right. You know, this is a lot 
of pressure on households and, you know, we have to be very clear, a lot of pressure on those 
households, of course, who are, you know, less able to afford it. I think, yes, the measures as 
I understand, you know, the government has announced will help in that respect and I think 
it's important that we separate monetary and fiscal policy here. Fiscal policy can be more 
targeted obviously and, you know, I leave that to the chancellor but that's important. What we 
have to do is focus on our objective and say that we've got to get to the point where we can 
stabilise inflation, we can bring it back down to target and counter the effects of the terms of 
trade shock. Just to finish, there is an awful lot of uncertainty around at the moment, I mean, 


you know, you'll observe we only have to look at the volatility of energy prices at the 
moment to see the nature of the challenge we're dealing with.  
 
Helia Ebrahimi, Channel 4 News: Governor, this is a historic squeeze on household 
incomes. Your forecasts say they're going negative by 2%, very, very painful for people. 
People are paying more for food, fuel, energy and their taxes. You said a moment ago that 
monetary policy can't prevent trade shocks but on top of the squeeze they're experiencing 
with inflation, the bank is now going to raise interest rates. Aren't you just making a bad 
situation worse for real people?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Can I respond to that by saying that the reason we have to do this is because 
if we don't take this action it would be even worse. I mean, this is the problem if we let 
obviously the shock that we've all already had to inflation be compounded by in a sense what 
we tend to call the 'second round' effects and particularly through the low pressure in the 
labour markets. So, it's a hard message. I know it's a hard message. I'm not going to in any 
sense hide from that but if we don't take this action it'll be worse.  
 
Ben Broadbent: No, I mean, I think it is important to understand that it's not possible for 
monetary policy to undo the effects on real income of the shocks we've seen and the best 
thing we can do for the economy, for households, for firms is to do everything we can to meet 
our mandate, which is to keep inflation stable over the medium term and that is the best 
contribution we can make to steady growth and a stable economy in the future.  
 
Chris Giles, Financial Times: Governor, could you explain exactly how you think the rise 
in interest rates is going to effect the economy? Are you effectively when households are 
down already trying to kick them a little bit harder to squeeze them further or are you trying 
to change expectations that they don't ask for pay increases? What do you think? How do you 
think this is actually going to effect the economy?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well, I would say looking forwards that the expectations point that you 
highlight is important because it comes back to the point about how particularly bargaining 
and the labour market is going to emerge. I mean, another thing to say about the labour 
market is and it sort of follows from what I said about the good news on unemployment, that 
it is extraordinarily tight now in terms of what I call sort of quantities in the labour market. I 
mean, I'm sure you all pick it up, when I go around the country talking to businesses, when 
we all go around the country talking to businesses it's the first, second and third thing that 
businesses want to talk about, which is pressure in the labour market and the cost of labour. 
So, to your question, Chris, it is very important and of course it's very important, as you 
know, with obviously with the lag in the transmissions of monetary policy that, in my view, 
certainly the expectations element is very important. I mean, Dave and Ben will no doubt 
want to come in on this as well.  
 
Dave Ramsden: I think the expectations point that Andrew emphasises in which the 
committee has been flagging for some time is critical here. We've got this agents survey that 
shows, you know, a very contemporaneous survey showing settlements running at 4.8% this 


year. Against that backdrop, against the very significant tightness of the labour market that's 
driving that with unemployment, as Andrew says, lower than I think we expected. That's 
good news that's forecast to be 3.75% in this quarter, you know, for the MPC as a whole it 
was clear that in order to manage those risks around expectations and therefore those upside 
risks around inflation that we tighten policy at this meeting.  
 
Lucy White, Daily Mail: We've spoken about some of the, you know, squeeze that 
households are already feeling and, you know, are set to feel over the coming months. I 
mean, even further down the line you've got unemployment rising to 5%, you know, growth 
slowing. What hope can you give households at any point over the next few years?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well, I mean, the hope really is that of course we do have a forecast that 
stabilises inflation and that's important. The other thing I would say and I just want to come 
back to the uncertainty point again, you rightly say, of course, that the central case has 
unemployment going up to 5%, so from let's say broadly-, I mean, we think it's going to come 
a bit under 4% but broadly from just under 4% to 5%. If you look at the alternative projection 
that we did using market futures prices for energy, actually the increase in unemployment is 
about half that actually. So, you know, there is a lot in play here, as it were. There's an awful 
lot of uncertainty in terms of the outlook. There are better outcomes, relatively better 
outcomes and there are, as you rightly said, you know, relatively less good outcomes. Now, 
we hope that we'll get the better outcomes, obviously. We really hope that but, as we've said, 
I have to be honest with you that obviously some of the big underlying drivers of this are not 
things that monetary policy can influence, and we have so been living through an 
extraordinarily volatile period in terms of some of these external prices.  
 
Phil Aldrick, Bloomberg News: The Chancellor has just unveiled a package of measures to 
reduce energy bills by about £200. If you have a straight read across to the inflation, peak 
inflation at 7.25%, how would that affect it? Also, what's happened since November? The 
average weekly earnings growth forecast then was 1.25% for this year, it's now 3.75%. So, 
we've seen a trebling since the November forecast, so what have you seen? What has changed 
so dramatically in the last two months?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well, I mean, I'll take the first one. I might get Ben to come in on the 
second one. So, I'm afraid to say we were briefed yesterday on the package of measures that 
the chancellor has just announced, entirely in line with MPC procedures, that's why we have 
a Treasury representative on the MPC. We have not been able to put those through the 
forecast and we don't yet know the impact, one reason why, it's not just the fact that it was 
little time, it's also the fact that there's I think some important judgements that the ONS have 
got to come to in terms of how they impact the CPI particularly, which they have not yet 
reached. So, we will have to wait for those judgements to be made to assess that and 
obviously the next forecast will have all that in it. Ben, did you want to-,  
 
Ben Broadbent: Yes, just on the wage growth. I'll start with one slightly fiddly point, several 
points Andrew has referred to something called 'underlying wage growth' because the 


headline figures had been heavily effected, as you know, and continue to be effected by 
changes in the mix of employment. Its compositional effects, as we call them. There's a graph 
at the beginning of Chapter Three on Page 37, if you're interested. We have had those 
compositional effects and changing effects in the forecast as well but we think they'll 
diminish at a faster rate and that is contributing to some of the predicted pick-up in headline 
wage growth. It's not an economically meaningful thing in the sense that it doesn't feed 
through to inflation but it's worth remembering that the headline figures that you see and the 
change that you refer to are effected by judgements about these compositional effects. In 
terms of underlying pay growth, the more meaningful measure, it's true that that measure has 
picked up and Dave referred to the agents survey, that's always very informative for us. They 
do one on pay prospects at the beginning of each year. It's not picked up by as much as the 
headline numbers you refer to but it has gone up in the forecast and in terms of the underlying 
reason for that, I think it's the same as we discussed at the beginning with Faisal. It's 
predominantly the continuing tightness in the labour market, which although unemployment 
is more or less where it was two years ago, our measures of tightness indicate a lot more 
tightness than would normally be the case with that level of unemployment.  
 
Phil Aldrick, Bloomberg News: That was the case three months ago. 
 
M: No, no but it's tightened further. It's tightened further and unemployment has been lower 
than we expected. These measures of tightness have gone further and if you look at that agent 
survey, that is the main reason for the pick-up in wage growth but just to re-emphasise what I 
said at the start, the numbers you quite exaggerate the revision in the forecast, the meaningful 
bit of the forecast. Thank you.  
 
Tim Wallace, The Daily Telegraph: Governor, can you explain how serious this sort of 
cocktail of effects is that we're feeling at the minute? Omicron whacked growth pretty much 
down to zero, we have rising bills, rising taxes coming up, now rising interest rates as well. Is 
this a sort of Black Thursday moment for the economy?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well, so I'll, sort of, separate those things out. So, at the risk of saying, 
'Well, you would do this, wouldn't you?' Let me start with the good news, the effect of 
Omicron is a lot less certainly than I think it was feared it would be when it initially 
obviously broke and we were all trying to work out what the effect was. I mean, we took a 
view on that when we had our meeting in December and our initial view then was we thought 
it would have quite a disruptive effect during the initial, sort of, couple of months, so really, 
sort of, the remainder of December into January and a little bit of February but we didn't 
think it would be lasting. We've obviously now been able to come back and take another look 
at it with the benefit of more evidence, more of the sort of high frequency evidence and we've 
actually if anything reduced the effect further because the evidence that we've now got 
coming through suggest that while it will have an effect, and it will certainly, certainly flatten 
out growth in these months, it will not be lasting and it will not be I think anything like as big 
as we might have feared it might be when we first heard the news of Omicron. So that's a 
better piece of news. Meanwhile, as we've been saying, you know, we've had this remarkably 


volatile period of particularly energy prices, plus obviously within that volatility some very 
steep increases in energy prices, which obviously you're seeing in the announcement that 
Ofgem made this morning. The third thing I would point to of course is that there are two 
parts to this story about what economists tend to call terms of trade shock, energy is one of 
them and the other one is traded goods in the sense of more finished goods. That's a story 
which obviously we've been, you know, talking about for some time, so that's not a new piece 
of the story but it has persisted for longer. And I think the reason it's persisted for longer, well 
I should pick out two reasons. (1) we've talked before about the effect of COVID in terms of 
shifting the mix of demand within the economy from services to goods, it fits in all the stories 
that you write about, you know, we see in terms of what people spend their lives that doing. 
And that shift back, so we expect that to revert, but to be frank it has taken longer for that to 
happen, now that you can link I think to the COVID story, that's the first part. And the second 
part is that obviously in some parts of the world the response has been different, particularly 
where there are zero COVID policies in place, and there have been some effects again on 
supply chains.  
  
And let me finish that by saying I think one of the key things, certainly when I look at the 
evidence at the moment, you know, I've got a number of things I'm looking at to say how are 
they going to emerge? And one of the key things is are we beginning to see evidence that 
those supply chain effects and those goods blockages are now beginning to resolve 
themselves? And our judgement would be yes we are beginning to see some signs but we 
need to see a lot more evidence of that to draw conclusions from that. So there is news there 
but, you know, to coin the phrase the jury it out, and on energy prices I think we've got risks 
frankly both ways. There's a risk in the best sense of the word that they could come down 
over time, but let's be honest there's a risk they won't and I'll be quite frank and I'll say if 
there is any form of military, you know, action around Ukraine that would obviously be a risk 
the other way, I have to be honest with you. I'm not by the way preaching about what should 
happen there, it's not for central banks to do but I'm pointing out the risk.  
 
Ben Broadbent: Would you mind if I just add something very quickly to that? I mean rightly 
Andrew's been emphasising the, as you all have, scale of this increase in energy prices and it 
is extraordinary, I think, maybe Ed can check the numbers, that this represents the steepest 
rise in energy costs for household as a share of income in a year, which is the source of your 
point, that we've ever seen, probably including the seventies, I mean I would have to check 
that. And underlying that is this huge rise in wholesale energy prices in Europe, so pre-crisis 
they averaged less than 50p a firm. And in May 2020 they fell to seven, and then just before 
Christmas they were 415. Now that's since come back quite a bit but they're still four, five 
times higher than average. And another thing that Andrew mentioned was we've taken what 
was a pretty cautious view, notwithstanding the upside risks in the near term, about the 
medium term path of those energy prices, much more cautious than market expectations. And 
if the market were right, obviously there's huge uncertainty about that, then quite a bit of 
what we've seen, not all of it, but quite a bit of the increase we've seen will come back. And 
although we don't spell out the full details of the alternative scenario in which that does 
happen, it would undoubtedly lead to relatively strong real income growth for households in 


2023 and 2024, were that to happen. So there's a question about whether this is permanent, 
historically swings like this do not last, we'll have to wait and see. I just think it is a fact that 
relative to the market our forecast takes a relatively pessimistic view of the path of those 
wholesale energy prices.  
 
Francine Lacqua, Bloomberg: Governor, given the fact that four members actually voted 
for a 50 basis point hike, do you concede that the Bank of England is behind the curve?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Sorry I couldn't catch the end of it Frances, sorry.  
 
Francine Lacqua, Bloomberg: Is the Bank of England behind the curve?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Are we behind the curve? No. No you should not conclude that from the 
voting pattern, I think what, and obviously each member can speak for themselves, it was a 
close call but that's not surprising given the situation we're in. And in my opening marks I 
said that, you know, it will not be surprising if we see a further increase but please don't get 
carried away. And there is genuine debate in monetary policy which I think was reflected in 
the deliberations we've had over the last period in this decision, which is, you know, one 
route if you like is to take it in steps, take the steps, see what happens, see what evidence 
comes in and then decide whether to take the next step. There is another, obviously you know 
which side of the debate I came out on it because you can see, but let me say there's another 
perfectly legitimate approach which is to say let's observe the risk that we've talked about, 
let's observe the expectations point that we were talking about earlier and say we should 
make a larger move now because that will actually send a very strong message. Now that's a 
very legitimate debate to have, it's been, you know, going on as long as I can remember in 
monetary policy, it's quite reasonable we have that debate. I'll speak personally now, I think 
given the uncertainty that we've talked about already, you know, I think there is a strong case 
in my own view for taking a step, observing what happens, observing what evidence we've 
got coming in, whether we're seeing a few turning points on things or not, and then we will 
come back together again and do it all over again. But you can take two views, I don't know 
Dave do you want to say anything on that point?  
 
Dave Ramsden: You set out the position that I and three other members of the committee 
took very clearly Andrew. I mean para 54 sets out the thinking of the minority and it really 
does come down to that risk assessment, as Andrew says, against the uncertainties that we've 
been talking about. I mean when you look at, you know, the risk is clear whether it's from the 
agents settlements survey or indeed looking from the companies side, our decision maker 
panel. Which the latest results from that suggest that companies think they are going to be 
able to pass through some of the cost pressures into higher prices, so this isn't just about 
labour, I think the whole committee agrees on this, it's not just about labour, it's also what's 
happening on the companies side. And so for the four of us in a minority, we thought that risk 
assessment justified voting for a 50 basis point increase at this meeting but the majority went 
for 25 basis points and that's where we are. And that's a tightening of policy, which, as 


Andrew says, I think still sends a clear signal on the commitment of the committee to get 
inflation sustainably back to target consistent with our mandate.  
 
Phillip Inman, The Guardian: I just wanted to see if you'd explain a bit more as to why you 
think that this large hit to real incomes is not going to do heavy lifting that you need? And 
why you think that that's not enough to bring down demand? Why you still need to raise 
interest rates? And could you also explain a bit more about why you think that your rate rise 
won't contribute to people demanding higher wages?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well I'd get Ben to come in but I would point you to the other version of the 
forecast that we've published, which is the constant rate forecast, which is also in the 
monetary policy report. In other words, yes the forecast where we don't move rates and what 
you see is inflation does not come back to target, after three years it is not back to target. So I 
think that in a sense supports the argument that we do have to take some action, and 
underlines why it's needed for the reasons we've been discussing earlier. But Ben, did you 
want to?  
 
Ben Broadbent: Yes it's a very good question and indeed if you look later on in the forecast, 
towards the tail end, a combination of the effect of that drop in income and spending, and the 
rises in the yield curve, in the market expectations the bank rate and which the forecast is 
based, are enough by the third year of the forecast actually to push inflation slightly below 
target. But as Andrew says there's more in between, we based this on a curve which had more 
than one hike priced into it. On your second question, I mean it would be a bit odd, and it 
certainly runs against the grain of all the evidence that putting interest rates actually increased 
inflation, so we don't think that that effect is significant enough to undo what are normally the 
effects in the other direction.  
 
Phillip Inman, The Guardian: I meant increasing rates rather than increasing inflation.  
 
Ben Broadbent: No well the evidence doesn't say that. I mean it is the case that the margin, 
this will slow down demand growth and add a little to slack, and in the medium term slightly 
lower wage growth than would otherwise have occurred.  
 
Anna Isaac, the Independent: Thank you Governor. It was really interesting to hear you use 
the word ingrained, and, you know, that being what this is hike is about, you're trying to 
avoid that. Could you define your bar for ingrained please? Just so we get a sense of what it is 
you're trying to avoid, this worst case scenario you describe.  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well I think to use the word ingrained would-, it sort of goes back to the 
point Ben was just making actually that if we found that wage pressure built in the economy, 
and that of course would also affect companies pricing behaviour. We don't see that coming 
off in the way that we think it needs to, to get back to the inflation target, then for a longer 
period of time, and, you know, I can't tell you how long because frankly that's not something 
we've in any sense tried to quantify, it would be hard to do so, you would see a much longer 
period of higher inflation. And then the risk is of course that we come back to the 


expectations point, the risk is then that becomes embedded in people's expectations and it 
becomes harder to get it out again. Now, I would just add the point that in a sense of course 
this is added to by the fact that the good news, the good news I said earlier, which is that 
we've got a tight labour market. Now, you know, there's good news at a tight labour market, 
we've come through, fingers crossed, COVID with a far stronger, you know, unemployment 
and employment record than we feared frankly. So we go into this with a tight labour market. 
And there's a number of things that you can draw out behind that, I mean we look at them a 
lot. Unemployment now is really, you know, getting back to where it was pre-COVID. 
Participation rates fallen somewhat, so that's contributing to a tightening labour market. 
There is more competition for labour, I mean I would observe that public sector employment 
has risen during the COVID period, so that competition for demand for labour. And of course 
we're seeing that in what we tend to call the churn rate and also in the vacancies position, so 
the churn rate is interesting, you know, both of these have risen sharply, so the vacancies to 
unemployment has risen sharply, the churn rate has risen sharply. And again, I go round the 
country talking to firms, we all do, you know, there is a lot of talk about competition and 
people moving for higher wages, and of course that does eventually feed through into the 
whole economy. So, you know, in terms of the dynamics of this point you rightly raised 
about ingrained, those are the sort of dynamics, and if those built a lot further then we would 
I think get a much more serious situation.  
 
Arthi Nachiappan, The Times: Looking a bit further into the longer term, we're looking at 
after only twice wage growth contracted since 1990, it's set to contract this year and next year 
even though it's more significant this year and inflation is set to remain above 5% next year 
according to your forecasts. Do you think households are prepared for the impact of this to 
last for as long as this is supposed to given that we haven't seen this kind of situation in more 
than 30 years?  
 
Andrew Bailey: It's a really good question and it's a difficult question to answer because I 
don't think we have, you know, a direct observation of the thing that you raised, which of 
course it would be very interesting to have by the way if we could sit households down and 
say, 'What do you expect in that sense?' I mean I would conjecture that I think, you know, 
news of the sort that we're obviously having today, and I'd say plural because obviously both 
the Ofgem announcement and obviously our own rise in bank rates, will obviously affect 
households thinking about this. I think, you know, it would be hard to think that the news of 
the last month or two, and the amount you've all written about cost of living which is sensible 
by the way don't get me wrong, I mean that's what you should be writing about in many 
ways. But obviously you're part of that, I mean it feeds through into thinking of households. 
So I would expect that households are adapting their expectations, I mean I was saying a few 
minutes ago that, you know, in my own position of the take a step on interest rates, observe 
what happens, one of the things we'll certainly be asking our agents to look at next, certainly 
from my point of view, is, 'Are we starting to see signs of consumption expenditure by 
households adjusting down because of the growing concern,' that you rightly point to. And 
are we observing the evidence and the forecast that the squeeze around incomes is happening. 


So yes we'll be watching out, that's a, I think for me anyway, quite a key indicator of what 
we're going to see next.  
 
Jack Barnett, City AM: Governor, do you think there was an opportunity missed in the 
second half of last year to begin this rate hike cycle and potentially curb this 7.25% pique 
inflation you've got forecasting in new forecast.  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well can I say nicely that we do have to avoid hindsight judgement here. So 
we do have to go back to the context that we faced at the time, and let me make two points, I 
think Ben may want to come in here as well. So let me go back to one particular point and 
then make a more general point, the particular point you might point to is obviously back in 
November, but the issue we faced at the time on which we had to make a judgement was to 
do with the effects of the ending of the furlough scheme, and the fact that far more jobs were 
using the furlough scheme right up until its end state than we expected. So that in a sense led 
to a, sort of, bigger question about what the effect was going to be. Now with the benefit of 
hindsight, you can barely see that in the labour market data, that's true. I would say, and you 
may say he would say this wouldn't he, so I'm just going back to a point I made earlier about 
Omicron, I mean we also had to make a very big call on Omicron back in December when we 
did the first rising bank rate, when we took a view on its severity and, you know, I think 
broadly we took the right view. But let me go back, as I say the November judgement was all 
about the furlough scheme. Let me just start the more broader point but I'm sure Ben will 
want to come in on this, if you think about the lag in the transmission of monetary policy, and 
let me of course point again about this is predominantly a terms of trade shock about which 
monetary policy cannot do much. But let's take that point off the table for a moment, you 
know, if you subscribed to the view that we should have been raising interest rates, you 
know, at a point when we can of have affected this, notwithstanding what I've just said, you 
would have been saying, 'We would have been raising interest rates during the some of the 
pique periods of COVID.' And I really don't think that's a very, you know, 
contemporaneously not a view that I think really holds much water. But do you want to?  
 
Ben Broadbent: No I mean that was the main point I was going to make that to suppress the 
inflation we're getting right now and the pique in April would have meant (a) given the lags 
to have had the foresight that the wholesale gas price would not stay at seven pence per firm 
but go up well over 200, eighteen months, two years beforehand. And (b) to have raised 
interest rates bang in the middle, given the average estimate of those lags, of the first wave of 
the pandemic and the lockdown. Furthermore because of the unavoidable nature of the 
consequences for real income, that would not have improved real income now. In order to 
keep inflation down close to target, even assuming we had that foresight and tightened policy 
very aggressively in the middle of 2020, the means by which we would have pushed inflation 
down would have involved much lower wage growth and higher unemployment. So the 
consequences for real income as it happened would now be worse had we done that, now 
we'd be meeting the inflation target but one can't pretend either that, you know, putting up 
interest rates in November or September would have done much to effect inflation. And the 
only way it could have done, even had we done it earlier, was, because this is the way 


monetary policy works, by suppressing domestic demand, domestic wage growth and 
employment.  
 
Andrew Bailey: I would observe an even further, sort of, stand back point on this is that we 
are of course having to set policy in an era of much bigger shocks. I mean that's the point 
underlying all of this.  
 
Eshe Nelson, The New York Times: I'm just wondering, are you thinking of this as more 
COVID scarring? Or is this more like a post-pandemic era in your mind where this impact on 
inflation that's eventually going to force you to raise rates to the point that it slows the 
economy? Is this, kind of, still a COVID era, or do you think you're past that?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well I mean all three of us may have views on this. I don't think it's a story 
about COVID scarring really. I mean I think, you know, just coming back to the good news, 
the recovery in employment for instance post COVID is very encouraging. Now I would 
however make the point because I think you do have to, sort of, bring it back into this point 
about the rebalancing of the economy because employment arguably-, well not arguably, has 
recovered in a period where we still don't think demand has rebalanced between goods and 
services. So you may reasonably come back to me and say, 'It's nice of you to say that 
employment has recovered, but, you know, what do you think is going to happen when this 
rebalancing does happen?' You'd expect the economy to work its way through that. So, you 
know, for me it's not really a scarring story. I don't know, Dave wants to come in.  
 
Dave Ramsden: Yes I think that's right at the aggregate level it's not a scarring story. But as 
Andrew has emphasised there is a lot of adjustment going on within the economy, you know, 
we've had sectors opening up at different rates, both globally and domestically, and that has 
led to some of the supply chain pressures that we're still dealing with. And also some of the 
factors that Andrew was highlighting that have been driving the labour market tighteners, the 
fact is that we have seen participation, you know, we're in this position where unemployment 
has turned out I think quite a bit better than even the most optimistic were thinking but we 
have got higher public sector employment, particularly in health. We have seen a reduction in 
participation, so some of that may reflect, you know, some COVID effects still but at the 
aggregate level that's not really what we're talking about here, we're talking about what's 
looking like the post-COVID economy. GDP is now back at pretty much the level it was pre-
COVID, and know it has been hit by very significant energy price shock on top of that. So I 
think, you know, back to Andrews point, we dealt with a once in century COVID shock, 
pandemic shock, now we're dealing with a significant energy price shock. So you have got 
some big structural factors that we're having to account on.  
 
Ben Broadbent: The only thing I would add is to emphasise that in some ways what we're 
seeing is, if it's not scarring and aftershock from COVID or more persistent effects, we've 
talked a lot about this huge rise in the price of trade of goods, energy most visibly but many 
other things as well. And that I think is an effect globally of COVID, and this switch from 
service to good demand was a global phenomenon. In the middle of last year, just to give you 


one very prominent example, consumer spending on durable goods in the United States was a 
third higher than it had been before the pandemic, now the US economy was nothing like a 
third higher than it had been but that arose because of this big switch in demand, it was 
fuelled by the fiscal easing in the US as well, which was itself a response to COVID. And it 
would have been very hard I think for the global economies suddenly to switch to supplying 
services roughly to supplying all those goods without some increase in costs, and instead 
what you have, thanks to COVID, was restrictions on that global supply of goods. And some 
of those effects are still going, and as Andrew said earlier it's for that reason we think that the 
rise in these prices has persisted for longer than we expected. Of course the counterpart of 
that is if these things were to correct, if some of the demand globally switches back, or if 
supply chains ease, then some of these global trader goods prices, not just energy but others, 
could fall back. So I wouldn't say it's scarring but globally, sort of, the global economy is still 
feeling the after effects of COVID.  
 
Matei Rosca, Politico: The 2% hit to household incomes is post-tax, and I wonder if that 
takes into account the tax increases that are due in April? And if that's the case, could the 
country actually be better off if those tax increases were cancelled? And sorry a subsidiary 
question, would it have been impossible to foresee the disastrous increase in energy prices 
and mitigate it somehow? Thank you.  
 
Andrew Bailey: Well I afraid I'm going to start by saying of course we do not comment on 
fiscal policy, on other Government policies, we condition the forecast on announced 
Government policies. And by the way, as I said earlier, that's announced, you know, at the 
point when we close to the forecast so just to be clear again not on what the Chancellor 
announced this morning. And I don't make any comment on fiscal policy at all. On the point 
about, you know, would it have been possible to foresee energy prices, I mean I think Ben 
has obviously just spoken about that quite extensively. It's really very interesting to look at 
what's going on with energy prices, and I think you can tell a number of stories, what I think 
is much more challenging is give, if you like, weights to those stories, you know, give them 
relative contributions. I mean if I had to tell stories about energy prices, I think you can point 
to a number of supply disruptions, particularly in terms of the gas infrastructure. You can 
obviously point to the tension on the Russian, Ukrainian border and the significance of 
Ukraine in terms of the gas infrastructure and the supply. You can then point, going back to 
Ben's point about a point I made earlier about the goods services mix because goods are more 
intensive, the production of goods is more intensive in terms of the consumption of energy. 
So there is a demand story in there and we see that particularly in parts of Asia. And the final 
one I'd give, which is much more conjectural actually I have to be honest, but it's important, 
and it's important going forward, is, you know, are we now beginning to see a switch in the 
mix of energy demand reflecting the response to climate change concerns, rightly? Are we 
beginning to see a switch for instance out of more carbon intensive energy sources, coal, into 
still carbon intensive but relatively less so, so in other words increasing the demand for gas?  
  
And I say that because again I can't give you any sense of a weight of that proposition, but I 
think it's very important as we go forwards with what is obviously a very long transition, 


necessarily so, to net zero that we understand the implications of the adjustment path here. 
And we understand the implications for the demand for conventional energy sources and how 
those are switching because otherwise, you know, we could get more shocks. And absolutely 
to your point Matei about can we foresee those, well we should be able to have a go at 
modelling at least some of those switching effects I think over time, it will make it a little bit 
less challenging, it's not going to solve the problem but it's important to do.  
 
Holly Williams, PA News Agency: I'd like to go back to an earlier question if I may about 
whether the bank acted soon enough to raise rates in December. So this is the first back to 
back rise since 2004 and looks like there may be more on the cards, is there a danger that 
you're now having to move faster and maybe further to raise rates and that's going to be 
adding to the shock on households than if you had perhaps acted in November or even 
earlier?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Sorry I didn't catch the last part, that we've had-, the risk of because of-, 
sorry I didn't catch that.  
 
Holly Williams, PA News Agency: Are you now having to move further and faster on 
raising rates because you didn't act soon enough?  
 
Andrew Bailey: Sorry because we didn't earlier?  
 
Holly Williams, PA News Agency: Yes.  
 
Andrew Bailey: No I don't think so, and I think it comes back to some of the points we were 
making earlier about hindsight judgement. I mean it is interesting actually that if you look at 
the path of market rates over the last few months, going back to the autumn. I'm not going to 
comment on the response to today's move because, of course, we've been in this room for a 
while. The path of the assumed rate at the end of this year hasn't shifted that much. Now, you 
know, as I said I'm not going to comment on what's happened this morning. And I think that 
it's important, going back to what I said earlier, to remember that, you know, this point about, 
in my view, moving in steps, being able to observe the effects of those steps, and the key 
point I make on this question is it's particularly important because we've really got two parts 
to the forecast. We've got a first half if you like which has strong inflation, risks to the upside 
as we've said, and then we've got a second half where inflation is coming off, that's the good 
news, but we've got risks going the other way because demand is reducing, and there's a clear 
risk that we can go under target. And I think, you know, there is merit in being able to 
observe quite carefully how those risks are evolving as we make policy step by step, that's my 
view. Now, to make the point, a lot of that comes down to how you respond to uncertainty, 
and particularly given the situation we're in at the moment, how you respond to elevated 
levels of uncertainty. And as I said earlier to another question, there are two ways of looking 
at that, I fully recognise. My own view is I think it's important that we take these steps, we're 
prepared to act, and by the way the Bank of England has now, you know, acted more times 
than other central banks I would say, I'm not criticising other central banks I'm just making 
that as an observation, and I think it's important.  


  
But, you know, let me leave with this balanced message. I think there will, you know, most 
likely, as the forecast says we've not come to the end, but please, I would say to everybody, 
don't get carried away about that message implies because there is a downside to this forecast 
which would end up with less action being taken than I think certainly some of us think will 
be needed.  
