SOURCE: inflation-report-transcript-february-2017.pdf
DATE: 201702
TYPE: transcript
============================================================

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bank of England   
 
 
 
Inflation Report Q&A  
2nd February 2017      


Page  2 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
Noreena Hertz, ITV News: 
Governor, back in August the forecast for GDP for this year 
was 0.8%.  Now it's being forecast at 2.0%.  That's a really 
hefty adjustment.  What went wrong with your initial 
forecast? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, I'd turn it around and say - what went right?  What 
went right first was policy actions that were taken by the 
Bank, then policy action that was taken by the Chancellor, by 
the government, both of which provide support into 2017.  I 
think, and I wouldn't overstate this, but our sense in terms of 
the transmission of both the macroprudential measures - the 
lowering of the countercyclical buffer and the monetary policy 
measures that we took was that they have had more traction 
than we would have expected at the time. 
 
 
Now you could say that we should have anticipated it at the 
time, but they had more of an impact than we expected at 
the time. 
 
 
The second thing that's gone right is that the global economy 
has been stronger and that also helps support growth in 
2017.   
 
 
I think the thing that we missed is the strength of consumer 
spending and consumer confidence associated with that, that 
was present - has been present all the way through this 
process.  So after an initial wobble in terms of consumer 
surveys, confidence surveys and other indicators in the 
immediate aftermath of the referendum in the depths of the 
summer, it bounced back pretty quickly.  And you don't see it 
in the data and in the activity of consumers. 
 
 
So consumers have not been affected by any of the 
associated uncertainty around Brexit.  And that is to a large 
degree understandable.  I mean, the labour market is still 
holding up, wages are growing roughly the same rate - 
modestly - but roughly the same rate as they had in the past.  


Page  3 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
And in part because of our actions, credit is available and it's 
cheap, if it's needed. 
 
 
Now that dynamic will start to be tested as this year 
progresses.  The consumer dynamic will start to be tested as 
this year progresses, as real incomes move from growing 
closer to 3% to growing closers to 0%, if our forecast is 
broadly correct.  And the question will be - with what speed 
do consumers adjust their spending this year? 
 
 
In this forecast, in the very near term this quarter, we 
actually anticipate less of an adjustment than we had in 
November.  The bigger news to the forecast though as you 
progress through 2017 is, if you will, external.  It's better 
world, bigger fiscal, better financial conditions which make 
the difference.  So that's the delta. 
 
Kamal Ahmed, BBC: 
Governor, you've spoken about inflation risk.  Obviously one 
way to control inflation risk is interest rates.  Lots of people 
will have mortgages, lots of people will be considering a 
house purchase this year.  Can you tell them, compared to 
the last Inflation Report, is there more of a risk of an interest 
rate rise than there is of a further interest rate cut? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, what we - first thing we've just taken a decision and 
obviously, we haven't changed interest rates.  So that's the 
most concrete thing we can say. 
 
 
We can see scenarios in either direction, and I gave an 
example of perhaps we could have a sharper adjustment of 
consumer spending.  I would note that our forecast has a 
quite sharp further reduction in the savings rate of 
consumers, which is necessary to support the degree of 
consumer spending that we have in it. 
 
 
That said, we have made some important assessment 
judgements - in this forecast, one of which relates to the 


Page  4 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
degree of excess capacity in the economy or the slack in the 
labour market.  We think - and this is a good news story - we 
think that the economy can run with a lower rate of 
unemployment - more people can be in work without us 
having to adjust policy.  
 
 
Now that's a judgement.  It's based on a lot of analysis.  It's 
based on, as I said in my opening remarks, a series of 
overestimations of wages that we have made over the last 
several years.  
 
 
But we'll find out much about the accuracy of that, if the 
economy continues to grow roughly at rates similar.  And if 
we do see a situation where there is faster growth than 
wages than we anticipate, or that spending doesn't decelerate 
later in the year as that real income squeeze comes, or some 
combination of those.  One could anticipate that there would 
be an adjustment of interest rates, an increase in interest 
rates - that is not a signal; that is laying out some of the 
factors that would influence it. 
 
 
The other point I would make is that one of the differences 
between now and November is that - to a very gentle degree 
- the market has started to build in some increase in interest 
rates over the course of the next few years.  And of course, 
we have conditioned our forecast on that, so when we talk 
about policy could go in either direction, it's either direction 
relative to the market curve, if you will, or the market path of 
interest rates that are in. 
 
Chris Giles, Financial Times: 
Governor, the big picture here is that you've revised up 
demand and you've revised up slack.  They exactly offset 
each other so you don't have to do anything on policy. People 
might say that's convenient.  Reasonable people could 
disagree about both the judgements on demand and on 
supply. 
 


Page  5 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
You've got nine reasonable people on your Committee who've 
all come to exactly the same judgement.  Does this worry 
you? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Two things.  One a not unimportant detail.  The other part of 
the puzzle, or the equation, if you will, is there has been 
some appreciation of sterling - 3% appreciation of sterling.  
As I just said to Kamal, there also has been some - the 
market path has some increase in interest rates, both of 
which help ensure a similar trade-off between the two. 
 
 
In terms of - you know, there's a range of view on the 
Committee, both on the strength of demand and the degree 
of slack and the risks around the trade-off that we are 
striking.  So, in other words, and so those risks around the 
trade-off relate to - by and large - the risks around the 
economic forecast. 
 
 
One can paint scenarios, as you just alluded to, where the 
economy has more momentum or has less momentum or the 
labour market has more or less slack.  But, you know, the 
balance of judgement is that the stance is appropriate.  No, it 
doesn't worry me because these are judgements that are - 
we have come to on the basis of vigorous debate, vigorous, 
detailed analysis of the issues.   
 
 
And we I think share a view both of the main forces acting on 
the economy, the framework for analysing those, the trade-
off we're broadly trying to strike and we will be - those 
opinions will evolve with time.  And it's reasonable to expect 
that different people will come to different conclusions at 
different times, as the economy moves forward and the 
degree of uncertainty reduces. 
 
 
So just because we agree today doesn't mean that we would 
agree at the next meeting or subsequent meetings.  That's 
the way it works. 


Page  6 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
Ed Conway, Sky News: 
Governor, for some people perhaps the most alarming chart 
in the Report would be the one on page 36, of the savings 
ratio.  Are you and the Bank really relaxed about the savings 
ratio going down to the lowest level on record? And given that 
you have dropped interest rate to the lowest level since 1694, 
are you not in some way part of that, complicit, if not 
responsible? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, the - distinguish between the savings ratio and 
consumer borrowing, and certainly the adjustments to 
macroprudential policy capital rules and the adjustments to 
monetary policy encourage borrowing.  Those who are saving 
less out of income are making a judgement about their future 
incomes, to put it in the simplest terms, and may have a 
more positive view of their future incomes than - well, time 
will tell whether those views of future incomes come to pass. 
 
 
I think what I would say about the savings ratio - our view on 
the savings ratio is we view this as plausible on current 
trends.  It does show that there are two-sided risks around 
our forecast for household spending.  It certainly - one could 
see scenarios where, because of shocks or just because of - 
for other reasons where people decide not collectively to draw 
savings down to the same extent, which would mean slower 
growth, more slack in the economy and have implications for, 
at least domestically, generated inflation. 
 
 
In terms of - I'm going to say a word on household 
borrowing, if I may, which is - we look at this from an 
institutional perspective.  We start from a very basic premise, 
which is that any time you see a credit aggregate grow 
rapidly, accelerate, you should dig into it and try to 
understand better the dynamics behind it.  How long it's 
going to persist, is it sustainable?  And the pick-up in 
unsecured consumer credit, which I would include auto.  We 
can debate about whether to include auto leases in that, but 


Page  7 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
we've included auto leases in that.  That falls into that camp 
and it falls into the camp at least initially of the FPC and the 
PRA.  The MPC takes interest in it because of what it may say 
about the pace of consumption going forward. 
 
 
So you can expect that the FPC and the PRA are taking a look 
at underwriting standards, the sustainability of this, all the 
things we should be doing - and we have been doing, in 
fairness, with previous stress tests. 
 
 
From an MPC perspective, just to put those numbers into 
context, on the most expansive definition, the increase in 
consumer borrowing would contribute up to a tenth of the 
increase in consumption.  So it's something, but it's not 
everything.  This is not a debt-fuelled consumer expansion 
that we're dealing with. 
 
 
Now that doesn't mean we shouldn't focus on the issue more 
broadly with our institutional responsibilities, but the bigger 
picture is- where you started your question, which is around 
households' willingness to draw down savings during a period 
where real incomes are being squeezed.   
 
 
The last thing I will say on that is that one of the reasons why 
they might want to do that is that we are going through a 
period for a few years where we have higher inflation because 
of pass-through of a weaker exchange rate.  And the two will 
pass, and so households may take a decision to look through 
that.  But it's a big judgement. 
 
Phil Aldrick, The Times: 
Governor, Theresa May has laid out some more clarity on her 
position for negotiations with Europe, and I just wonder - I 
mean, obviously this has serious economic implications in 
terms of membership of the single market.  And I wondered 
how that position may affect your forecasts going forward or 
whether it's been factored in already? 
 


Page  8 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
Mark Carney: 
Yes.  So, the short answer is - we haven't changed our 
judgement for the purposes of this forecast about the long 
term resting place for our relationships with Europe and other 
potential trading partners.  And the reason we haven't is a 
couple-fold. 
 
 
The first thing is the Prime Minister laid out really a range of 
potential alternatives.  At one end of the spectrum was a 
walk-away position equivalent to a WTO-type position.  And 
the other end of the spectrum was an ambitious, bold, 
comprehensive trading arrangement with Europe which - and 
also, while not being in the customs union would have 
customs union-like characteristics - potentially. 
 
 
So that's a wide range.  Entirely understandable why, and it 
would be a false position for us to try to narrow that gap 
before the negotiations even began.  And then on top of that, 
as you're well aware, the country's begun initial exploratory 
discussions with a range of other countries about potential 
new trading arrangements to follow after the exit from the 
EU. 
 
 
Which gets me to my next point.  Of course the bigger impact 
of all these is offstage, if you will, from this forecast.  In other 
words, they actually take effect in all likelihood - likelihood, 
not certainty – beyond the forecast horizon. 
 
 
And the effect on supply, particularly, is predominantly 
determined - at least in a judgement that we make - by firms' 
investments plans - changes to firms' investment plans in 
anticipation of those potential arrangements. 
 
 
And as I said in my opening comments, you know, we do 
have - at least the uncertainty around those potential 
arrangements has a pretty material impact on investment.  
It's about a quarter lower than it would have been according 
to our May forecast, our sort of undisturbed forecast.  And 


Page  9 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
that has some impact on productivity, it has some impact on 
the capacity in the economy and therefore inflation. 
 
 
But those impacts, as you can appreciate, are dwarfed by the 
ultimate impacts on the economy of the ultimate deals that 
are struck.  So it would be false precision to refine it is our 
judgement, and I suspect - I can't bind the Committee - but I 
suspect that will continue to be our judgement as the 
negotiations progress over the coming years, because one 
thing about trade deals is that they're never agreed till 
everything's agreed.  So it's not clear we'll be that much 
better informed on the final outcome.  
 
 
And the key judgements we will have to make is about the 
scale of business reaction to those possibilities and what it 
means, particularly for productivity but also for hiring. 
 
Helia Ibrahimi, Channel 4 News: 
Governor, this week we had a rather unprecedented 
intervention from President Trump's economic advisor which 
moved the currency markets.  I wonder if you could reflect on 
whether it's becoming more difficult to be a central banker 
when political commentary is becoming more and more 
influential and more unpredictable, and specifically whether 
you think it's right for politicians to criticise other 
governments' currency policies? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, let me see how I can get out of that.  I think they - 
what I'd say is that, in many respects we're coming to the 
last seconds of central bankers' 15 minutes of fame, to use 
the, you know the Warhol line, which is a good thing.  
Because we're moving more - I talked, in this forecast and 
my opening comments – I mentioned fiscal policy a couple of 
times, for the UK a notable increase to growth because of the 
Autumn Statement and our judgement in other economies' 
rotation to fiscal policy.  That's positive; it's a more balanced 
policy mix.  Also, structural policy is becoming more 


Page  10 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
important, trade policy - clearly important here and 
elsewhere. 
 
 
And that, just in general, is a much better balance than - to 
use the over used phrase - than the only game in town being 
central banks and monetary policy.  So this is positive; so I'm 
not going to quibble about specific comments at specific times 
in what is a you know, a generally positive direction of travel. 
 
 
And you know, as members of the MPC - Ben, Minouche and 
my other responsibilities - you know our job is to take other 
policies as given and then optimise around those, or respond 
to those policies.  And that's what we'll do, whether it's UK 
policy or the policy of our major trading partners. 
 
Larry Elliott, The Guardian: 
I'd like to ask you a question about the labour market and 
your view of the labour market, where you seem to have 
accepted that the analysis by the former MPC member, 
Professor Blanchflower, is more accurate than your own have 
been in the last few years.   
 
 
But just as a way of asking this question, is it really plausible 
that - with the labour market pretty tight, some indication 
that there's been a fall in the number of migrant workers 
coming to the UK, some evidence of skill shortages - that 
people in the UK are not going to try and bid up the price of 
their labour as their living standards start to be eroded in the 
course of the next couple of years?  Isn't it more likely that 
they're going to try and push up wages as they are in the US? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, it's certainly possible, and the question is whether that's 
the most likely scenario.  And I'll say a couple of things and 
then pass to Ben in terms of what specifically we - how we 
made our judgements on the labour market side.   
 
 
But we have been looking quite hard at the wage puzzle in 
the UK, and we have examined a series of candidate 


Page  11 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
explanations which helped explain part of it, but never the 
whole.  So the composition of the labour force was one 
element; the impact of inflation expectations on wage rounds 
was another element.   
 
 
But even controlling for these factors we still had big, so 
called wage residuals.  And I'll put a number on it.  If you 
took any of our wage forecasts in 2015, the four wage 
forecasts for 2016 wage growth, they overestimated by 1% 
to 1.5%.  So these are big, you know these are big 
differences, and that's part of how we got to the judgement. 
 
 
In terms of where wage pressure is - and there's a variety of 
surveys on that - I mean, we feel pretty comfortable as a 
central expectation.  The one piece of information I'll give you 
on the other side just to balance it, and I wouldn't overweight 
this, but it is referenced in the Report, which is that our Agent 
surveys of wage settlements suggested a pretty marked 
deceleration of wage settlements this year - so going broad 
brush, from 3% to about 2%.   
 
 
Now I wouldn’t overweight that because that's only a subset 
of the market.  It has been a pretty good indicator in the 
past, but of course every time something is a good indicator 
in the past and you mention it at one of these press 
conferences, it's by definition no longer relevant.  So we'll 
stop doing that survey from now on. 
 
 
But no, we are picking up, we're not picking up a lot of that 
yet.  And so I think the point - and then I'll pass to Ben on 
the specifics - but the point that we were trying to make in 
the MPS and I made in the opening statement, is that we will 
be looking quite closely at what happens to regular pay.  
Because we've made this big judgement, and if a world 
transpires like you're suggesting, that will have implications 
for the stance of - that could well have implications for - the 


Page  12 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
stance of policy.  So it's right to spend time on it.  So how did 
we get there, Ben? 
 
Ben Broadbent: 
I don’t think I've got much more to add.  I mean the 
Governor is right; the main piece of evidence is the relatively 
subdued rate of wage growth over a number of years.  I 
mean - we talked about this as a Committee as long ago as 
four or five years ago.  We mentioned specifically the 
possibility of a lower equilibrium rate a year or so ago, and 
again last May.  And now that we do these regular annual 
assessments of supply, we had the opportunity to look at it 
more in depth. 
 
 
You're right that, I mean the main piece of evidence that 
would suggest risk to that view in the direction you indicate is 
the level of vacancies.  There's a chart showing those.  We 
think now, having done quite a lot of work in this, that that 
piece of evidence is mitigated somewhat - I won't go into the 
technicalities as to why - by certain demographic changes in 
the labour force, including gradual increase in average 
educational attainment.  But the main reason is the lower 
level of wage growth than we'd forecast.   
 
 
Specifically, with reference to your point you made about 
rising inflation and the response to that, that's clearly a risk, 
although this is a slightly different situation from one in which 
the inflation is domestically generated.   
 
 
If you've got a rise in prices, the benefit of which goes to 
British firms, then they can afford to pay higher wages.  The 
difference in this case, as indeed it was in 2009, is that it's 
import prices that are going up and the benefit of that doesn't 
go to British firms.  And indeed if you look at the survey of 
the Agents to which the Governor referred, they do cite that 
as one of the factors, that firms say - well, we simply can't 
afford to compensate everybody for the rise in import prices. 
 


Page  13 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
Now there are risks around this, and that is why we flag it as 
one of our key judgements.  You know, there was a range of 
views on the Committee about how low this number should 
be, and it's a pretty important judgement.  And, you know, I 
think there are risks on both sides.  So we will be watching 
pay growth, notably regular pay growth - the underlying rate 
of pay growth - quite closely over coming months.  We do 
expect a little bit of an acceleration, I should say, we do 
expect wage growth to rise, but not by that much. 
 
Ben Chu, The Independent: 
Governor, you've conceded that the main reason, the 
dominant reason why the Bank's forecasts last August were 
wrong was because the Bank did not foresee that consumers 
would carry on spending the way they did after the Brexit 
vote.  How worried are you about the Bank's misjudgement 
about consumer psychology in that way?  Do you think that 
this means you should have a fundamental revisit of the 
Bank's models?  Most people, after getting a big call like that 
wrong, would naturally be pretty nervous about the next call 
they had to make, so how nervous are you? 
 
Mark Carney: 
I'm not.  No, look, I think the - last summer we were in 
pretty exceptional circumstances.  A big decision had been 
taken; we did not yet have a clear course for how to 
implement that decision from the Government, the 
Government was just being formed.   
 
 
You had a sharp, a sharp fall in business and consumer 
confidence, on any survey, on any measure.  And it was - and 
you had a sharp fall in financial market measures as well.  So 
unidirectional view of - at least near term where the, in terms 
of survey measures - there were people who had different 
views - but if you had any sort of aggregate measure, 
whether it was GFK surveys, whether it was CIPS surveys, 
whether it was asset prices, said the same thing. 
 


Page  14 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
And so the question - and on top of that an understanding 
that there would be a period of adjustment that necessarily 
would happen and that that in and of itself was likely to weigh 
a bit on demand as businesses had to hesitate in terms of 
investment, something we're seeing, and it would have - 
could have knock-on effects.   
 
 
So the judgement of the Committee, which has a remit for 
exactly such exceptional circumstance literally written into the 
remit, that we should think about balancing the trade-off - 
took the judgement, which in retrospect we think is correct, 
because we've just confirmed the policy stance - even after 
having very welcome news in terms of the strength of the 
consumer and improved global economy, a fiscal response 
from the Government, we still have the same policy stance.  
So it's hard to then sit here and say - well we shouldn't have 
done that.   
 
 
 
And in fact, by doing it and, you know, I'm not going to 
overstate the case, but there is a case that we helped support 
the economy during an important time.  And very importantly 
given the way monetary policy transmits through to the 
economy, we will help support the economy as the squeeze 
starts to come in, this squeeze on real incomes starts to come 
in this year and next year.   
 
 
And during a period, where arguably the degree of relative 
uncertainty about the ultimate outcome is elevated, because 
it will be in the middle of negotiations, and so businesses may 
be hesitating - we're seeing some evidence of that.  We talk 
to the business; it's entirely understandable.  So we provided 
that support for that period of time.   
 
 
And we can always adjust policy from this position.  But we 
would be adjusting policy from a position of strength, a 
position where the economy has grown, a position where 


Page  15 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
more people are in work, a position where people are getting 
paid more.  And that is a far, far better place to be. 
 
 
And the last point here, which is I think very important to 
stress, is that we are going to go - we're just starting this 
period, we think this month will be the month where inflation 
comes back to target, gets back to 2%.  Now it will only be 
there briefly because it's going to go above target.  It is going 
above target because the exchange rate has fallen 18%.  And 
the predominant reason why the exchange rate has fallen 
18%, is because we are going through this process of leaving 
the European Union.  That is the market's judgement at 
present of the appropriate level of the exchange rate, given 
that process. 
 
 
Now the market will constantly revise its judgement and you 
know, in all likelihood - well I shouldn't predict, but certainly 
circumstances where better arrangements struck with 
Europe, better arrangements struck with other countries, the 
adjustment process moves forward, the exchange rate 
adjusts up, that's certainly reasonable.  That's part of how 
that tension between where the consumer is and the market 
is can be resolved.   
 
 
But given that judgement of the market, given the real 
change that - fundamental change that is in prospect, we 
took a decision to help support the necessary adjustment 
during that.  And it's still valid today because we've just 
confirmed that appropriateness of the stance.  Now we've laid 
up potential conditions around how we might, if we had to 
change, what would be particularly informative for that. 
 
Ben Broadbent: 
I want to add one thing about the forecast for last year.  I 
mean, you know, unfortunately we didn’t need only the 
experience of the second half of last year to tell us that 
forecasting is a hazardous business when you've done it as 
long as we have.   


Page  16 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
 
I would make a distinction, however, between - just because 
you raised the question of models - between economic 
models, which we use for forecasting over the medium term, 
and the stuff we use for more short term forecasting which is 
very different.  It’s based on these survey measures because 
they generally have a reasonable correlation with subsequent 
moves and output.  Those fell extremely steeply in July - as 
steeply, if not more so - than anything we saw in the financial 
crisis.  That was overwhelmingly the reason for the 
downgrade in growth we made, and indeed other forecasters, 
almost all other forecasters I think, made a more aggressive 
downgrade.  We were amongst the very few not to forecast a 
contraction in GDP in the third quarter of last year.  We 
aimed off; as it turns out we didn’t aim off by enough.   
 
 
Now in the forecast - and we thought well, if we were to get 
this severe weakening, how would it happen?  And we 
therefore said - you know, you fit the bits of demand into it.  
But we don’t use economic models to forecast in the very 
near term and nor do any forecasters.  Now as it turns out 
very happily, those surveys bounced back and looking 
backwards, it looks like consumer spending, strong consumer 
spending growth was the thing that most surprised us relative 
to that August forecast.  But we do them in a slightly different 
way and they were extremely volatile.   
 
 
And we take a look at the forecast as you know regularly, at 
the forecast performance, and I think we’re doing another - 
our annual assessment in May, at which point we probably 
will look again at all the statistical evidence regarding the 
links between the survey indicators and output. 
 
Szu Chan, The Telegraph: 
Just a follow up on your comments on consumer debt.  You 
said that this is not a debt fuelled consumer expansion, you 
outlined the reasons why, unsecured credit growth, the 
annual pace has slowed.  But on the other hand, one of your 


Page  17 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
scenarios is that consumers continue to buy things on credit.  
You said at a recent FPC hearing that it would be a big call for 
the FPC to tweak policy beyond ensuring the core system is 
resilient.  What would that big call involve and is this 
ultimately a question for the FPC and not the MPC? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, I think from a first order - yes, it is an FPC or a PRA call.  
I think the first stance is to ensure whether it’s mortgage 
underwriting or commercial real estate underwriting or 
underwriting of consumer credit, that the standards are 
appropriate.  And if they had been appropriate that they’re 
maintained; there's not that slide from responsible to 
reckless.  And that’s something that the PRA regularly 
reviews and from time to time can do thematic reviews of 
such issues. 
 
 
From an FPC perspective, as you know, it’s on a longer time 
horizon when you start to - if that first point is satisfied and 
you’re confident that the financial institutions are adequately 
capitalised against these risks - both because of capital and 
because of underwriting standards - then the question 
becomes are you growing - is the economy growing a bigger 
and bigger group of people who are heavily indebted that will 
face real trouble when the interest rate cycle turns?  And as a 
consequence of that, amplify the business cycle, so beyond 
the monetary policy cycle.   
 
 
It becomes an issue for the MPC really only - well not only, 
but as part of a variety of indicators and drivers or supports 
to broader consumer behaviour, as part of broader aggregate 
demand, relative to supply, relative to inflation.  So it’s - I 
mean, of course we care about it, but it starts earlier up the 
chain, and I would suggest that at this stage that it is more of 
an issue for the PRA or the FPC than it is for the MPC.   
 
 
There have been a number of questions quite rightly about 
household spending, the track of spending relative to savings, 


Page  18 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
the risk both on the upside and the downside to that.  We’ve 
been seeing upside behaviour since August - Ben's question.  
One can also anticipate that it could go the other way, which 
is why we’re flagging this as a very key judgement. 
 
David Smith, Sunday Times: 
Governor, you've talked quite a lot about labour market slack.  
I just wanted to ask you about another measure of slack 
which is spare capacity within firms.  Three months ago you 
thought there was substantial spare capacity within business; 
now you think there's very little.  Normally if firms don’t have 
much spare capacity, they would invest and invest quite a lot 
and clearly, for the reasons you've said, you don’t expect 
that.  So what are the consequences of very little spare 
capacity within business and weak investment over the next 
three years? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Yes, it’s a good point.  And in part that explains part of - 
sorry, a slightly technical start to the answer which is that’s 
part of the explanation of the revision to our productivity 
forecast, which is the productivity benefit of using up that 
spare capacity is not there with the judgement. 
 
 
It is quite a weak or modest investment forecast here, 
particularly given that investment has been - as I said at the 
start - has been flat since the end of 2015.  And it’s based on 
our read of the surveys, it’s based on our conversations with 
businesses across a range of industries and it’s based on 
what is, we think, a reasonable judgement, which is that 
during a period of uncertainty that - what we’re finding, 
David, and be interested in what you’re seeing, but what 
we’re finding is that, in general, projects that are either in 
train, had been green lighted before if we use that term are 
proceeding, including those that rely on a high degree of 
access to the European Union.  
 
 
But new projects, things that are still on the drawing board, 
things that are coming up to the boardroom, if they have a 


Page  19 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
component that relies heavily on access - whether it’s up the 
chain in the supply chain or down the chain in terms of people 
buying the product or the service - are being deferred.   
 
 
I mean, that’s understandable.  And whereas for businesses 
that are outside, don’t have exposure to Europe, have 
exposure to the rest of the world, have the benefit of the 
lower level of sterling, have access to credit and labour, 
they’re unaffected by this.  In fact, they’re quite bullish.  So 
you get a pretty mixed picture.  All of that, on balance, leads 
to this lower track for investment than we would have seen a 
year ago. 
 
 
But all of it, on balance, is in an economy that - at least with 
our latest forecast - that’s growing 1.6%, 1.7% over the 
course of the next two years.  So it’s significant but I wouldn’t 
overstate it.  And if there's clarity towards the end of that 
time horizon about access, there could be some significant 
pent-up investment demand to put it on the other side, and 
certainly businesses are ready to adjust when they know 
what they’re adjusting to. 
 
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News: Governor, you mentioned earlier about market expectations 
for interest rates have risen since November, in fact they’ve 
risen quite markedly.  These forecasts are based on markets 
pricing in a full 25 basis point interest rate rise by early 2019, 
and in fact they’ve risen even further since then, now pricing 
in a rate hike by the end of 2018.  Do you think that market 
pricing is appropriate, especially considering that implies an 
interest rate rise just months ahead of Brexit?  Could the 
Bank of England really raise rates just months ahead of 
Brexit? 
 
Mark Carney: 
I’ll make the general point which is that we will calibrate 
policy appropriately regardless of the timetable.  Obviously, 
we take into account major events, but I'm not going to 
comment on the specific day-to-day moves of the market.  


Page  20 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
But I will make the general observation, as the Committee 
has, that this forecast is conditioned, as you said, on a 
market curve that has a gently rising rate of interest rates 
and that there are two-sided risks around that.   
 
 
So when we talk about scenarios with consumer borrowing - 
or sorry consumer spending - or that there may be less 
labour market slack or that exchange rate pass-through 
doesn’t come through exactly as we expect and we realise the 
upside risks, then you know, it’s possible that policy would be 
tighter than that path.  Now that’s not a promise and it’s not 
a prediction, it’s not guidance on it, but the Committee will 
take the decisions it needs to do.  And what it’s tried to do 
consistently, in advance of the referendum and in subsequent 
forecasts and today, is to flag as much as possible the key 
drivers and the way it is thinking about the trade-off it has to 
strike.   
 
 
So as much as possible we’re trying to give you, the market 
and the British people, the information they need to judge 
what we would do if the economy performs better and there's 
more inflationary pressures or if the converse happens. 
 
Eric Albert, Le Monde: 
I just wanted to come back to something you said in front of 
the Treasury Select Committee a couple of weeks ago, that 
there are greater financial stability risks on the Continent in 
the short term for the transition compared to risks in the UK.  
Now I mean, there is no doubt that there are a lot of EU 
corporations getting financing in the City here, but big banks 
have said they would be moving jobs - UBS, HSBC.  
Therefore that finance will be where the clients need them.  
That would tend to show that, if finance does move, that the 
financial stability risk for the EU is not that big and indeed 
maybe it might be bigger for the UK than for the rest of the 
EU. 
 


Page  21 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
Mark Carney: 
I totally disagree with your logic.  The core of this activity to 
which you referred - and let’s take derivative markets, the 
front end of derivative markets not the back end, not the 
clearing - is highly complex, highly interrelated and needs to 
be intensively and continuously supervised.  And the ability to 
pick that up and move it to another jurisdiction, people, 
capital, models, collateral, that is a very, very complicated 
exercise, there is huge operational risk involved in that, 
there's huge financial risk involved in that.  It’s not something 
you do overnight.   
 
 
When we have an individual institution, and more of this 
business is concentrated in London than anywhere else in the 
world.  In fact, 40% of the business is concentrated in London 
globally - not European, globally.  Three quarters of European 
business here, but 40% globally.  So when we have an 
institution, major global institution who reorganises itself and 
has to move people, capital and trading books, collateral into 
the UK arm, in order to do it right, it can take up to four 
years for one institution.  We’re talking about moving the 
whole activity in extreme scenarios.   
 
 
Now the one thing I know is the capacity is here, the 
collateral is here, the people are here, the capital is here, the 
expertise is here, the supervisory ability is here, the clearing 
is here.  So the one jurisdiction that is going to have capacity 
is the UK.  What we need to do as regulators, as authorities, 
is - within whatever is agreed - is to try to smooth whatever 
transition needs to happen.  But it shouldn’t be 
underestimated how to do this.  And if it is done conveniently 
with workarounds, then one's taking black box risk in the 
jurisdiction that accepts the workaround. 
 
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk News: Good afternoon, Governor.  Just going back to the global 
picture, E3 baseline is for continued easing this year, while 
the third baseline is pricing three heights throughout the 
course of this year.  How does this complicate policy outlook 


Page  22 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
for the Bank of England?  How do you weigh each of those 
diverging policy regimes? 
 
Mark Carney: 
Well, Harry, that I mean - those potential policy paths are 
incorporated in asset prices and market prices and they fold 
into our forecast.  Let me give you one example of this.   
 
 
I said at the outset, and we say in the Report, that one of the 
reasons why we marked up global growth is because of an 
anticipated fiscal stimulus in the United States, okay.  Now 
the Trump administration, the President has been very clear 
about the broad directions of that, but the specifics will take 
time and so we’ve done our best to make an estimate of that.  
On our estimate of that fiscal stimulus, the market path 
doesn’t fully offset that fiscal stimulus, so it’s net fiscal - 
market path sorry for interest rates doesn’t fully offset, for US 
interest rates doesn’t fully offset.  So we take that into 
account.   
 
 
It then affects demand for UK exports; it affects the 
pressures on inflation here, and ultimately feeds into the 
policy determination.  So that’s one example of how we would 
take it into account, but in effect we take it as given and use 
market judgements on that and optimise around it. 
 
Jason Douglas,  
Wall Street Journal:  
Could I just ask you to say a bit more on the global outlook 
as well please, particularly around its fragility?  We have, as 
you mentioned, a US administration that’s talking on the one 
hand about fiscal stimulus but also about more protectionist 
measures.  We also of course this year have pretty high 
stakes elections in Europe.  Given that the stronger growth 
sort of underpins your forecast for the UK, how fragile do you 
think it is and what are the consequences for the policy trade 
off that you describe?  Thank you. 
 


Page  23 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
Mark Carney: 
Are you okay, Jason?  You've got a bit of a cold; okay just 
want to make sure [laughs].   
 
 
In terms of - well let’s take the first part of your question 
because it slightly links with Harry's, which is that - for our 
forecast, as I say, we have marked up global growth.  And in 
fact, if you dig into it, the bit of global growth that matters 
most for the UK has been marked up more significantly than 
global growth.   
 
 
So just to give you broad numbers, I think it’s 2% - UK 
weighted global growth grew at 2% last year and it’s about 
2.4% by the end of this year and subsequent years.  So 
that’s a pretty - that’s significant and that’s part of the reason 
why better world in our view for the forecast contributes 
about more than a quarter of the increase in this forecast. 
 
 
And importantly in that is US fiscal which I mentioned, but 
also what has been an improvement in sentiment thus far in 
the United States and a business sentiment, and also financial 
conditions.  So we’re taking some of that on board in our 
forecast. 
 
 
We do have a downside skew to our global growth forecasts 
in year two and three, and they relate to some of the 
fragilities you mention.  So we’ve taken up the most likely 
scenario but we see downside risk.   
 
 
And not ascribing to any particular country or policy, but 
there are risks around de-globalisation that exist in terms of 
big changes to market access, whether it’s capital market 
access or access for goods and services.  And there are risks 
around - there are risks in emerging markets; we have long 
flagged some of the risks around China and domestic 
developments there, and how they could spill over if things 
didn’t go as well as hoped, how they could spill over globally.   
 


Page  24 
Inflation Report Q&A - 2.2.17      
 
 
 
And there is a bit of an intersection, as you can appreciate, 
between some of those de-globalisation risks and the China 
risk.  So that’s how we’ve taken that aspect on board. 
 
Jenny Scott: 
That’s about all we’ve got time for. 
 
Mark Carney: 
Okay.  So as some of you would know this is Minouche's last 
press conference as Deputy Governor for Markets and 
Banking and it’s noted in the Minutes, but just on behalf of 
the Committee, the MPC and all colleagues at the Bank of 
England, we want to thank Minouche for her service to the 
Bank and to the people of the United Kingdom.  I mean from 
time on the MPC, but really for making what was a new 
position, establishing it firmly and getting all the benefits 
across markets, banking and international to make this a 
more effective institution.   
 
 
And I can highlight many things but compliment particularly 
work that had a higher profile, which is a fair and effective 
markets review which has catalysed a series of reforms here, 
and in work which would have a lower profile, but is equally 
important around how we’re managing risk management for 
our balance sheet at the Bank, which as you many of you 
know is pretty big, and the reforms to RTGS, which is the 
large value payments system, which she's also received.  So 
on behalf of all of us - thank you, Minouche, and thank all of 
you for your attention. 
 
END 
 
