SOURCE: FOMC20180801meeting.pdf
DATE: 20180801
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
July 31–August 1, 2018 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 
D.C., on Tuesday, July 31, 2018, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, August 1, 2018, at
9:00 a.m.
PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, 
Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
July 31–August 1, 2018
1 of 219


 
 
 
Matthew J. Eichner,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment 
Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and 
Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial 
Stability, Board of Governors 
 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board 
of Governors 
 
Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board 
Members, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board 
of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
Luca Guerrieri, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
 
Glenn Follette and Shane M. Sherlund, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
 
Etienne Gagnon,3 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Matthias Paustian,3 Section Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
1 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations.  
2 Attended Tuesday session only. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
2 of 219


 
 
 
 
Hess T. Chung,3 Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
Andrea Ajello, Edward Herbst, and Bernd Schlusche,3 Principal Economists, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors 
 
James M. Trevino,3 Technology Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 
 
Michael Dotsey, Beverly Hirtle, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, and St. Louis, respectively 
 
Anna Paulson, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
 
Joe Peek, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
 
Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
A. Lee Smith, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
 
Brent Meyer, Policy Advisor and Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
 
Cristina Arellano, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
  
 
 
 
3 Attended through the discussion of monetary policy options at the effective lower bound. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
3 of 219


 
 
 
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
July 31–August 1, 2018 
 
July 31 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  As usual, today’s meeting will be 
conducted as a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board.  I will need a motion from a Board 
member to close the meeting. 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  And a second. 
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection, so ordered.  I’d like to begin by welcoming 
John Williams to his new seat over here as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York—John, welcome—and as Vice Chairman of the Committee.  Sitting in John’s old seat, 
representing San Francisco as acting president, is Mark Gould.  Mark, you’ve been to many 
FOMC meetings, but welcome now to the table. 
MR. GOULD.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Let’s go to our first agenda item, which is the special topic.  
This will be a discussion of our current monetary policy toolkit and how well equipped we are to 
provide sufficient policy accommodation in future economic downturns. 
I want to begin by framing this discussion clearly.  In defining our current toolkit, the 
intent is to include only the tools that we actually used during the Global Financial Crisis and the 
subsequent recovery and expansion and that are within the context of our monetary policy 
strategy, as specified in the consensus statement.  Specifically, these tools are interest rates, 
forward guidance, and asset purchases, or LSAPs.  As I will describe in a few minutes, in 
July 31–August 1, 2018
4 of 219


 
 
 
subsequent discussions we’ll broaden the lens to consider other approaches that might enhance 
the effectiveness of our policies. 
As for today’s discussion, in the years ahead this Committee may again face the 
challenge of achieving our statutory objectives in an environment in which the federal funds rate 
is constrained by the effective lower bound.  We need to develop the best possible understanding 
of the risks we face and the capacity of our current toolkit, as I have just defined it, to deal with 
those risks.  That’s the subject of today’s discussion. 
But, before we begin, let me also take a second and lay out the plan for a series of 
discussions at upcoming meetings.  This fall we will return to a discussion of our longer-run 
operating framework, a topic that we spent a good deal of time on in recent years without really 
trying to reach resolution.  As Simon and Lorie will discuss in their briefing, recent events in 
money markets have fueled debate among market participants about how much longer balance 
sheet reduction will continue.  And, although we are learning as we go, in my view, the balance 
sheet normalization process probably has a ways to go. 
To make their own assessments of the timing, market participants are understandably 
looking for guidance about our longer-term operating framework and, in particular, how we see 
the relative merits of the current floor system relative to those of the corridor system we used 
before the crisis.  I expect us to begin that discussion at the November meeting, and the Board 
staff and New York staff will provide background materials before that meeting. 
I also then expect that sometime during the first half of next year, we will follow up on 
today’s toolkit discussion and examine features of alternative policy strategies that could help us 
deal with future effective lower bound episodes—making them less frequent, less damaging, or 
both—and will include history-dependent strategies like price-level targeting.  In principle, I’m 
July 31–August 1, 2018
5 of 219


 
 
 
open to considering any approach that is of reasonably broad interest to participants.  Adoption 
of relatively novel changes to our approach would be a complex undertaking, likely requiring 
changes to the consensus statement. 
So that’s a view of the plan. 
Now, there are going to be overlaps and points of contact across these serial topics.  For 
example, there’s a connection between the use of LSAPs, potentially, and the choice of an 
operating framework.  Nonetheless, I suggest that we focus today on the subjects broadly laid out 
in today’s staff memo:  the likelihood of returning to the effective lower bound; and the efficacy 
of the tools we used in the crisis and the subsequent recovery. 
I see all of these discussions as a matter of prudent planning.  The economy is very strong 
and close to our objectives, and our current policy strategy and implementation framework are 
working very well.  But now is a good time to consider options that could enhance the 
effectiveness of our policies.  So I’ll look forward to your comments and will offer some of my 
own as well. 
Before turning to the staff presentations, let me applaud the staff for their effort on the 
memo we received and also for all of the related work in model development that went on behind 
the scenes.  And with that, we will turn it over to you. 
MR. CHUNG.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We will provide a brief summary of 
the memo sent to the FOMC on the efficacy of the Committee’s current policy tools 
to address ELB episodes.  We will be referring to the materials titled “Material for 
Briefing on Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound:  Assessing the 
Current Policy Toolkit.” 
Our memo reports estimates of the probability that the nominal policy rate will be 
constrained by the effective lower bound, or ELB, over several time horizons and in 
the long run.  Those probabilities are estimated to be sizable.  Against that 
background, we use simulations of the FRB/US model to determine how much 
additional policy accommodation could be delivered by unconventional measures of 
 
1 The materials used by Messrs. Chung and Schlusche are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
6 of 219


 
 
 
the sort previously deployed by the Committee.  In particular, we assess the efficacy 
of threshold-based forward guidance on the federal funds rate and balance sheet 
policies. 
In the top panel of your first exhibit, we report the probabilities of episodes when 
the ELB binds in simulations with the FRB/US model centered on a baseline 
consistent with the June 2018 Summary of Economic Projections.  Our current 
analysis features several important methodological improvements over that in 
previous memos sent to the Committee.  In particular, the frequency and severity of 
recessions in our stochastic simulations are now more in line with historical 
experience, while the use of an asymmetric policy rule better matches the past 
behavior of the Committee.  Specifically, in these simulations, the federal funds rate 
is governed by a version of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule that prescribes sharp 
reductions of the funds rate when the unemployment rate shows sustained increases.  
Under that policy rule, we find a roughly 40 percent chance that the ELB will bind at 
least once in the next 10 years.  In long-run simulations, we find that the ELB binds 
around 15 percent of the time.  Under alternative assumptions, as reported by some 
other studies also using the FRB/US model, this probability could be as high as 
35 percent of the time in the long run. 
We next assess the scope of forward guidance and asset purchases to provide 
accommodation when the ELB binds.  We first describe the effects of these additional 
tools in an illustrative scenario depicting a severe recession starting in 2018:Q3.  As 
shown by the solid red line in the upper left of the three figures at the bottom of the 
page, in the absence of unconventional policy measures, the unemployment rate 
peaks at 10 percent in 2020, while inflation, shown to the right, moves down to 
around 1 percent by the end of 2021.  As shown in the bottom figure, the federal 
funds rate falls rapidly to the lower bound, at which it remains for five years, until 
2023, when the asymmetric rule prescribes departure from the ELB. 
We now describe the effects of explicit forward guidance about the circumstances 
under which the federal funds rate would depart from the ELB.  Specifically, once the 
federal funds rate hits the ELB, it remains there until certain threshold conditions are 
attained at which point it follows again the prescriptions of the asymmetric rule.  The 
bottom figure displays the results for two alternatives:  one, the black dashed line, in 
which the federal funds rate stays at the ELB until the unemployment rate drops 
below 3½ percent (1 percentage point below the long-run natural rate of 
unemployment for these scenarios), and another, the blue dotted line, in which the 
ELB binds until the inflation rate rises above 2 percent. 
In the FRB/US model, these threshold conditions lower the path of the federal 
funds rate expected by financial market participants and hence also yields on the 
longer-term interest rates relevant for household and business spending.  However, in 
this model, economic activity is not very sensitive to the path of real interest rates and 
responds with a considerable lag.  Accordingly, the sharp increase in the 
unemployment rate in this scenario is largely unaffected by the thresholds.  However, 
thresholds that sufficiently delay exit from the ELB can speed up the recovery and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
7 of 219


 
 
 
restrain the decline in inflation.  In particular, as shown in the top figures, under either 
an unemployment rate threshold of 3½ percent, the black dashed lines, or an inflation 
threshold of 2 percent, the blue dotted lines, the unemployment rate converges back 
to the natural rate by 2023, while inflation bottoms out at 1½ percent, around 40 basis 
points above its trajectory absent threshold-based guidance. 
In long-run stochastic simulations, we find similar results.  Under the asymmetric 
rule, the median unemployment rate for a quarter in which the ELB is binding is 
6½ percent.  If we resimulate those draws under one of the two thresholds just 
described, however, the median unemployment rate would decrease by around 
¼ percentage point.  Likewise, the median inflation rate would improve by as much 
as 40 basis points. 
I will now hand over the discussion to my colleague Bernd Schlusche, who will 
present our second exhibit in which we assess the efficacy of balance sheet policies. 
MR. SCHLUSCHE.  We compared the macroeconomic outcomes that we obtain 
in the recession scenario when the balance sheet is assumed to remain passive with 
the outcomes that occur under two alternative balance sheet policies—a maturity 
extension program, or MEP, and large-scale asset purchases, or LSAPs—both of 
which are initiated as soon as the ELB binds.  Under the MEP policy, the FOMC 
extends the average duration of its SOMA security holdings while keeping the 
aggregate size of the portfolio unchanged.  Under the LSAP policy, the FOMC 
increases the size and duration of the SOMA holdings through purchases of longer-
term Treasury securities.  Under both policies, the reduction in duration risk faced by 
private investors depresses term premiums and longer-term borrowing rates, 
supporting economic activity.  We simulate the effects of these policies using a 
recently developed toolkit integrating the FRB/US model and the staff’s balance sheet 
model that enables us to perform a large number of simulations for a broad range of 
endogenous balance sheet policies. 
As before, the figures in the middle of the exhibit illustrate the macroeconomic 
outcomes under the two balance sheet policies in a severe recession.  The top-left 
figure shows the evolution of total assets held by the Federal Reserve for each 
balance sheet policy in the recession scenario.  The balance sheet under the passive 
policy, the solid red line, evolves as in the baseline.  Under the MEP policy, the black 
dashed line, the size of the balance sheet remains constant at around $4 trillion, or 
initially roughly 20 percent of GDP, starting in early 2019, when the federal funds 
rate reaches the ELB.  Compared with the passive policy, the MEP reduces private-
sector duration risk, lowering term premiums somewhat, shown to the right, but only 
slightly improving macroeconomic outcomes, the black dashed lines in the two 
bottom figures. 
Returning to the top-left figure:  Under the LSAP policy, policymakers increase 
the size of the balance sheet, the blue dotted line, to nearly $8 trillion in 2023, which 
amounts to 33 percent of GDP.  That expansion of the balance sheet exerts much 
greater downward pressure on term premiums.  The 10-year term premium effect is 
July 31–August 1, 2018
8 of 219


 
 
 
over 100 basis points more negative, on average, over the next several years under the 
LSAP policy than under the MEP policy.  As a result, the unemployment rate, the 
blue dotted line in the bottom-left figure, declines faster over the medium term, 
reaching its natural rate four quarters earlier than under the passive policy.  The 
inflation path is about ½ percentage point higher than under the passive policy at the 
trough, as shown in the bottom-right figure.  Because of the more rapid economic 
recovery, the federal funds rate—not shown—departs from the ELB three quarters 
sooner than under the passive policy.  Regarding the macroeconomic effects, we note 
that our estimates are based on the assumption that balance sheet policy affects the 
economy through conventional yield curve channels.  Other studies propose 
alternative transmission channels, and these could have different implications for the 
effectiveness of the balance sheet measures. 
We also analyze the relative performances of the LSAP policy and the passive 
policy in stochastic simulations.  In those simulations, we find that by 2020 the LSAP 
policy reduces the median unemployment rate when the ELB binds by about 
¼ percentage point compared with the outcome under the passive policy.  The median 
inflation rate rises about 20 basis points. 
The bottom panel summarizes the main messages of our memo.  The results 
suggest that there is a material risk that the ELB will bind in the future.  We find that 
the current monetary policy toolkit can offset only some of the effects of a significant 
recession and, even then, only by undertaking commitments that may extend a 
number of years into the recovery.  Specifically, although lags in the transmission of 
monetary policy limit the ability to offset the initial deterioration during a recession, 
the unconventional policy tools we consider can strengthen somewhat the labor 
market recovery and help raise inflation over time.  Furthermore, these long lags 
imply that, like conventional interest rate policy, unconventional policies should be 
deployed rapidly in the event of an incipient recession.  Finally, we note that our 
simulation results are, like any estimates of the macroeconomic effects in related 
studies, subject to considerable uncertainty, and alternative models and analytical 
approaches can produce different results. 
This concludes our prepared remarks.  We are happy to take any questions and 
look forward to your comments on these topics.  It would be helpful if your 
comments could address the three questions on the last page of your handout, which 
are reproduced from the memo that you received earlier. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks very much.  Questions for Hess and Bernd?  President 
Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just looking at, in exhibit 2, the term 
premium effect.  In preparation for this meeting, I was looking at the historical term premium 
with my staff.  And I’m just trying to reconcile the shape of this chart with the data. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
9 of 219


 
 
 
Maybe this isn’t a fair question, so forgive me, but right after the Great Recession, my 
recollection is that the term premium was very elevated, and then basically it gradually has 
declined to where it’s slightly negative today.  It seems like it’s the opposite shape in this chart.  
I’m not suggesting causation, I’m just curious how you think about this.  As the QEs were 
launched, the term premium was very elevated, and now they’ve gradually been coming down.  
Your chart shows the opposite effect.  Now, granted, I don’t know the counterfactual.  Maybe the 
term premium would have been even higher, absent QE.  I’m just curious how you think about 
the actual data over the past 10 years against this chart. 
MR. SCHLUSCHE.  Maybe I will start talking about the term premium effects, and 
somebody else could weigh in then on the term premiums themselves.  I’m talking about the 
effect stemming from the program. 
What you see in the top-right panel there is the term premium effect from the particular 
policy that we are considering.  The shape or the contour of the lines that you are seeing is the 
typical shape that we are reporting in the Tealbook, and it stems from the fact that, over time, 
you have some roll-off of the portfolio and, in addition, you have an aging of the portfolio.  So 
the maturity or the duration of the securities in the portfolio becomes shorter.  And because this 
model basically works off 10-year equivalents, you see this decay in the term premium effects as 
is shown here under the different policies. 
In the case of the term premiums, over time I would refer to— 
MR. POTTER.  I think there were two things going on in 2008 and 2009.  Treasury 
yields definitely went down.  Private-sector yields went up a lot.  Yields on mortgages went up a 
lot relative to those on Treasury securities.  So you did see this pattern that there was credit risk, 
which was really large.  Some of the LSAPs, particularly purchases of mortgage-backed 
July 31–August 1, 2018
10 of 219


 
 
 
securities, helped with that.  And then as the LSAPs got bigger in the U.S. Treasury securities 
market, that did have the effect of keeping the rates low for quite some time.  The other thing 
that’s really important is, in 2011—seven years ago—the forward guidance on rates had a really 
big effect on term premiums separate from the LSAPs. 
MR. CHUNG.  One other thing that I would add to what Bernd said is that it’s important 
to understand that, in our scenario, all agents know that the LSAP program will be undertaken 
once the ELB is reached.  I’m not sure that was the case immediately once the Great Recession 
started. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Perhaps if I could chime in.  The point that Simon made earlier about 
the importance of how long the assets are expected to be held—I think that there was some 
uncertainty in the early stages, right?  The Committee wasn’t very specific at the time when it 
started the asset purchases, but it then later clarified matters via its articulation of a reinvestment 
policy.  And, in fact, by that logic here, we estimate that the announcement of reinvestments in 
2010 also had a sizable effect, even though it didn’t change immediate expectations of the size of 
the balance sheet.  But, simply as a logical matter, if you went out and purchased some assets 
and said, “In a month from now, we will roll them off,” obviously the effect would be basically 
nil no matter what the size. 
MR. KASHKARI.  You had a different explanation than the one I had when I tried to 
explain it to myself, which was that maybe there was a lot of uncertainty about QE—maybe it 
would lead to high inflation, and that could have kept the term premium up early on.  And maybe 
the experience would be different now because people have confidence that it’s not going to lead 
to runaway inflation—the Committee will control inflation expectations.  But in any case, as we 
July 31–August 1, 2018
11 of 219


 
 
 
go forward, I’d welcome any additional explanation for how we reconcile this type of analysis 
with what we’ve experienced over the past 10 years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Further questions?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Looking at these charts here, I see they 
don’t have confidence bounds around the estimates, and the staff does note that there’s 
considerable uncertainty.  But if I tried to put confidence bounds around especially the term 
premium effect, what would it look like?  And would the bound include zero? 
MR. SCHLUSCHE.  You are entirely right.  There are huge confidence bands around it.  
I don’t have the precise numbers.  Does it include zero?  I would say it does not.  But I think 
there is previous work that has been conducted by the staff in the forms of working papers and 
FEDS Notes that reports the confidence bands—which are, as you just pointed out, quite wide on 
the term premium effects. 
I think what also sheds light on that is that, if you compare the term premium effects 
coming out of our model with the effects reported in other economic literature, including event 
studies and time-series studies, these estimates are quite comparable with what we see in these 
studies.  In fact, I think for the large-scale asset purchase programs, we are actually on the lower 
end of that range, whereas for the MEP, we are a little bit above estimates in the related 
literature. 
MR. BULLARD.  So a related comment would be, if you really think you can lower 
longer-term interest rates by 200 basis points, maybe that should be the primary tool for 
monetary policy instead of using short-term rates. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Any further questions?  President Rosengren. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
12 of 219


 
 
 
MR. ROSENGREN.  During the crisis, when we were estimating the effects, about half 
the effects were coming from the exchange rate.  What kind of assumptions are you making 
about the rest of the world and whether they’re at the effective lower bound?  Right now, Japan 
and Europe are still at the effective lower bound.  When you do these simulations and we think 
about how you’re calibrating what’s happening, is this a domestic U.S. shock and the rest of the 
world is not involved?  Or is this a global shock that is the same for the whole world? 
MR. CHUNG.  In this scenario, it’s a U.S.-only shock.  There will be some spillover to 
foreign economies, but it’s not the case that we calibrated the shocks so that the foreign 
economies were also in recession.  In stochastic simulations, it’s less clear what’s happening.  
This should track historical outcomes, but that would suggest that there is not a great deal of 
synchronization in stochastic simulations. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  So if the rest of the world were actually at the effective lower 
bound when you were doing your simulation, how much further out would it extend the time 
before we actually start seeing the kind of progress that you’re showing in these simulations?  
Would it be double?  Just the rough magnitude. 
MR. CHUNG.  I think with our current calibration, the exchange rate accounts for 
slightly less than one-third of the total effect.  We would still get some effect due to stronger 
foreign activity as a result of the stronger demand generally—there would be some spillovers.  
But the direct effect to the exchange rate would be suppressed. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think this is really an outstanding analysis, 
which addresses the question that’s posed, which is, to the best of our ability with the models 
July 31–August 1, 2018
13 of 219


 
 
 
that we’re looking at, what type of policies could improve the economic outcomes?  What 
policies are most effective—thresholds and things like that. 
The structure of the model, of course, is very important, and it probably limits how much 
we really learn about the circumstances we might actually face when we get to this.  So a 
question that I have that you didn’t really touch on in the presentation is expectations formation.  
In the model, you’ve got very well-defined expectations formation:  forward-looking behavior on 
the parts of financial investors and some backward-looking expectations for households and 
businesses.  At the moment, just looking at the problems that the Bank of Japan and the ECB had 
before 2014, credibility seemed to be really important.  Are there any insights on attaining that 
credibility that you see within the model or other work that you might be doing—or any 
guidance on how we might think about that a little more broadly? 
MR. CHUNG.  In our appendix, we actually have a fairly extended discussion of some 
credibility issues arising from the threshold.  Maybe I’ll defer to one of my colleagues who’s an 
expert on the subject. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Before somebody feels obliged to get up, I can chime in.  Because we 
now have the ability to imbed, in particular, balance sheet policies systematically into the model, 
this has allowed the authors to treat these policies as if they are perfectly anticipated.  I mean by 
that that agents in the model know.  So in some sense, in particular when it comes to the balance 
sheet policies, previously our analysis was basically always conditioned on “this comes as a 
surprise.”  Now, in contrast, these policies are actually anticipated.  So you might say, “Well, 
maybe we moved from one end of the spectrum to the other—and reality may be somewhere in 
the middle.” 
July 31–August 1, 2018
14 of 219


 
 
 
One piece of evidence that I find encouraging in terms of the direction in which we move 
is actually from the Desk surveys, because when you look at the results of the questions about 
the expected balance sheet size, which are broken out between the case in which the economy is 
not expected to go back to the lower bound and vice versa, when the economy is expected to hit 
the lower bound again, the balance sheet expectations are substantially higher for the latter case 
than for the former.  That indicates that there is some learning going on.  That indicates that if 
the economy were to hit a recession, arguably, at least financial market participants would expect 
these tools to be deployed again. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Further questions?  [No response]  Okay.  If not, let’s go to our 
round of comments, beginning with Vice Chairman Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I’d like to start by 
thanking the staff for the excellent memo.  It summarizes a number of important lessons 
regarding the implications of the effective lower bound. 
The first is, past is prologue.  We should not view the recent episode with several major 
advanced economies at the ELB for many years as an aberration.  The model simulations 
demonstrate that the ELB is likely to be a major risk for the United States and, indeed, the world 
economy for the foreseeable future. 
As indicated in the memo and the extensive research on this topic, this conclusion is 
robust across a variety of models and assumptions.  In fact, I view the risks associated with the 
ELB to be potentially even greater than implied by the memo.  One is the point that President 
Rosengren just made, and that’s the global nature of this risk.  Members of the staff at the New 
York and Dallas Feds have examined trends in real interest rates using data from seven advanced 
economies going back nearly 150 years.  They find that since the late 1970s, trends in real rates 
July 31–August 1, 2018
15 of 219


 
 
 
in these countries have converged toward a common trend, and this can be thought of as a world 
r*. 
This common trend has declined nearly 2 percentage points over this period, with the 
most recent estimate being around ¼ percentage point.  And this finding is in line with the GDP-
weighted estimates of r* in my work with Kathryn Holston and Thomas Laubach.  The decline 
in r* is a widespread phenomenon that began well before the Great Recession, and it’s primarily 
driven by global developments related to demographics, productivity, and the demand for safe 
assets rather than idiosyncratic, country-specific factors related to government policies.  And 
these global trends do not look likely to abate any time soon. 
An important implication of the global nature of this decline in r* is that we may again 
find ourselves in situations in which many countries are at the ELB simultaneously.  And that’s a 
far more challenging situation than if only one country is at the ELB. 
Now, a second source of my concern is that uncertainty about r* is greater than may be 
gleaned from reading the memo.  In particular, the memo explores three values of r*, 
corresponding to the range of estimates in the June SEP.  But this conflates disagreement over 
modal forecasts—which is typically pretty small—with true uncertainty—which is very wide, 
especially with regard to r*. 
Let me give a real-world example that makes this point.  If one had conducted the same 
exercise back in January 2012, the range of r* estimates in the SEP was 1¾ to 2½ percent.  In 
other words, the most pessimistic view in the Committee back in 2012 about r* was that it was 
1¾ percent.  And this compares with the current range of 1¼ to 1½ percent, which lies entirely 
outside the range that we wrote down less than seven years ago.  So, from a risk-management 
perspective, in which a low r* is far more damaging than a high r*, analysis of the implications 
July 31–August 1, 2018
16 of 219


 
 
 
of values of r* below zero, I think, would be highly informative as we think about the policy 
strategy questions that we will discuss later. 
Now, the second lesson from the memo is that we have proven tools that we can again 
deploy to at least partially mitigate the effects of the ELB on the economy.  But to have their 
maximum effectiveness, they must be used early and with vigor, because of the lags in monetary 
policy’s effects on the economy.  This principle applies to conventional monetary policy, which 
should, of course, be used aggressively in case of a severe negative shock, and this is illustrated 
nicely by the asymmetric policy rule in the memo. 
In other words, there is no reason to keep our powder dry.  It’s quite the opposite.  
Theory and history tell us that it’s best to move to the ELB with dispatch.  This principle applies 
equally to newer policy tools, such as forward guidance and asset purchases.  And I view explicit 
forward guidance as a natural next step in situations in which the ELB is salient and additional 
accommodation is needed. 
A key “takeaway” that I inferred from the memo and from experience is that, in order for 
forward guidance to be most effective, it must be bold—and, therefore, likely to be 
uncomfortable for us policymakers at the time.  Vague statements or weak conditionality are 
simply ineffective.  The success of the introduction of the strong, explicit forward guidance back 
in August 2011, after years of weaker verbal commitments to keep rates low, is an instructive 
case study on this point. 
I also view asset purchases as one of our proven tools to address severe downturns when 
at the ELB.  Now, it’s hard to predict exactly when and how we’ll use unconventional policies in 
the future.  For example, I don’t imagine us coming up with a Taylor rule applying to asset 
purchases.  But the important point is that we are ready and able to deploy these tools when and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
17 of 219


 
 
 
as needed.  This fact by itself should be reassuring to the public in an episode of severe economic 
uncertainty or recession.  Expectations will once again do what is needed to achieve our goals 
and should act as an automatic stabilizer in the sense of the anticipation of additional stimulus 
helps boost confidence and ease financial conditions, even before the ELB is reached. 
Now, despite the experience we have with conventional and unconventional policies, or 
perhaps because of it, it is more than prudent—I would say it is essential—that we open a 
discussion on possible policy strategies that can mitigate the constraint imposed by the ELB.  
This debate should be framed in terms of discussing the pros and cons of modifying the current 
flexible inflation-targeting framework with some alternative that can help us better achieve our 
dual-mandate goals in a low-r* environment. 
The potential alternatives are well known and include moving to price-level or nominal 
GDP targeting or to reformulating our price-stability objective in terms of an average inflation 
rate over a longer period than is currently understood.  Because forward guidance can be 
effective only insofar as the public understands our objectives and strategy and forms their 
expectations accordingly, a reformulation of the price-stability objective could help both on the 
front of better aligning public objectives and private expectations and in terms of enhancing the 
credibility and effectiveness of monetary policy.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’m very concerned that we are likely to hit 
the effective lower bound in future economic downturns.  In fact, the staff memo highlights the 
elevated probability that we hit the ELB, and I agree with Vice Chairman Williams that, if 
anything, I would have expected the probability to be higher, not lower. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
18 of 219


 
 
 
With productivity growth low, slow trend growth in the labor force, and inflation at 
2 percent, it is a reasonable assumption that the equilibrium interest rate will remain depressed.  
The current median SEP estimate of the equilibrium interest rate at 2.9 percent provides 
inadequate room for monetary policy responses that depend only on reductions in short-term 
interest rates, because, as the excellent supporting memo points out, the past three recessions 
have produced reductions of 5 percentage points, with one of those responses constrained by the 
ELB. 
In addition to our limited monetary policy buffer, I worry that the countercyclical buffers 
associated with our other policy tools have been depleted, leaving few alternatives to 
countercyclical monetary policy.  For example, the rapidly growing debt-to-GDP ratio will be a 
growing constraint on future countercyclical federal fiscal policy.  At the state level, most states 
have relatively small rainy day funds and have significant unfunded pension liabilities, providing 
little cushion for the next recession. 
Finally, the rest of the developed world is arguably even more poorly prepared to provide 
countercyclical policy support in the next recession.  They have worse demographics than the 
United States, slower productivity growth, below-target inflation, and even lower interest rates.  
The reality is that a fixed 2 percent inflation target with a balanced approach to our dual mandate 
might be appropriate if the equilibrium interest rate were high enough to provide room for strong 
monetary policy reaction to a recession or if other countercyclical tools were effective and could 
be deployed to complement monetary policy.  Unfortunately, that is not the case. 
One option to consider is the adoption of an inflation range rather than a fixed target 
value and using the upper end of such a range when real interest rates are low to provide us with 
July 31–August 1, 2018
19 of 219


 
 
 
a larger policy cushion.  But I think we should consider a wide variety of alternative proposals, 
and we should do so through a much more structured process. 
On question 2, I view forward guidance and balance sheet actions as useful when more 
traditional policy tools are not available.  However, I would note that many research studies of 
their effects during the Global Financial Crisis and afterward find mixed evidence of their 
efficacy.  And these extraordinary tools remain politically quite unpopular.  Thus, these are 
appropriate tools when short-term interest rates cannot be lowered rather than a perfect substitute 
for lowering short-term interest rates. 
I would also note that Japan has used much more radical tools, as has Europe, including 
more aggressive use of forward guidance and balance sheet tools, and still remains stuck at the 
effective lower bound.  But we should not take our forward guidance and balance sheet tools off 
the table.  We should have tempered confidence in their ability to substitute for the conventional 
policy of interest rate adjustment. 
For question 3, yes, the Committee should evaluate alternative monetary strategies to 
address the effective-lower-bound concern.  As I mentioned earlier, the Committee should 
consider many alternatives, not just the forward guidance and LSAPs considered in the memo.  
For example, a more flexible inflation target in a reasonable range should be considered.  Any 
such evaluation should be broader, involving something more than the occasional internal staff 
memo or the relatively pro forma discussion we have each January. 
I would prefer an open and transparent process that encourages input from a variety of 
stakeholders on possible ways in which to address the limitations imposed by the effective lower 
bound in a low real rate environment.  Such a discussion might also provide a systematic 
assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of our current framework, including the extent to 
July 31–August 1, 2018
20 of 219


 
 
 
which we will adhere to it.  Not only may we get some good suggestions, but it will also help 
with the communication with the Congress and the public should we decide eventually to make 
more fundamental changes in the framework.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d also like to thank the staff members who 
produced this thoughtful and, I think, very timely memo.  I believe it starts the Committee on the 
important path of deciding if and how monetary policy should confront the increasing likelihood 
of ELB events.  As President Rosengren has said, funds rate cuts in the neighborhood of 
500 basis points are typical during recessionary shocks, so the probabilities of hitting the ELB 
calculated in the memo actually seem reasonable to me and, of course, are of quite considerable 
concern. 
With repeated ELB events and the resulting likely shortfall of inflation from target, as 
I’ve stated in previous meetings, we risk the possibility that inflation expectations will fall below 
our 2 percent target.  Individuals and firms may gradually come to realize that the stochastic 
mean of inflation could lie somewhat below our stated 2 percent target and factor that reality into 
their expectations.  In that event, the Committee would face the added difficulty in achieving its 
dual mandate.  That possibility requires us to think seriously about a change in the way in which 
policy is conducted.  But doing so involves risks as well. 
In thinking about whether it would be advisable to evaluate alternative monetary policy 
strategies, the central issue is discovering the likely economic benefits of avoiding frequent ELB 
events versus the cost of changing our strategy.  If the benefits are large, then, of course, we 
should adopt an alternative strategy that reduces the chances of hitting the ELB.  But we must 
bear in mind that a change in strategy will also present challenges—challenges to our credibility 
July 31–August 1, 2018
21 of 219


 
 
 
if we change the inflation target and challenges to communications if any new strategy is to be 
credible and easily incorporated into the decisions made by firms and households. 
The staff memo helped me a lot in thinking about the relative cost of the ELB and 
whether unconventional policies will likely prove adequate.  It appears that the conclusion that 
comes out of the experiments that are run is that forward guidance and LSAPs are, at best, 
modestly useful.  The effectiveness of these policies may even be overstated. 
Regarding forward guidance, it appears that FRB/US is less subject to a forward-
guidance puzzle than the standard DSGE models.  But some confirmation of that conjecture, I 
believe, is warranted.  Insofar as a forward-guidance puzzle is present, the effects of forward 
guidance will be overstated, and the overstatement will increase with the number of periods in 
which forward guidance is employed. 
Regarding LSAPs, especially QE2 and QE3, I also question whether they are as effective 
as presented in the model.  The econometric literature on the matter has yet to reach a consensus 
on their efficacy.  Although the exercises are a very useful first step, I would benefit from 
looking at results from a wider range of models.  Now, I realize we will not uncover fully 
believable results on the basis of any one model.  But I think some robustness experiments could 
help guide my opinion on the extent to which we can count on alternative monetary policies. 
Along those lines, an inflation target that gets revisited periodically may be a useful 
option, especially if other models confirm that interest rate policy is our most effective tool and, 
we hope, more effective than it appears to be in the FRB/US model.  The change would be 
relatively easy to communicate.  But it may pay to wait until an ELB event reoccurs.  The model 
is predicting fairly high probabilities.  But the models have been wrong in the past—and it would 
July 31–August 1, 2018
22 of 219


 
 
 
be useful to have some confidence intervals associated with the probabilities reported in table 1 
specifically. 
Alternatively, we could resort to negative interest rates, which would have a similar 
effect to raising the inflation target but may not be feasible.  But if we deem it somewhat 
feasible, it may be worth discussing.  And if we change our strategy, we should communicate the 
change well in advance. 
Regarding unconventional policies, I prefer forward guidance and perhaps even forward 
guidance that is threshold-based through the use of asset purchases.  In using a threshold, we 
must be reasonably confident that the threshold is attainable, or we could stay at the ELB forever 
or, worse, end up with an infinitely large balance sheet.  And judging attainability is likely to be 
difficult, as our models may not be capturing the economic channels that will be responsible for 
driving interest rates back to the ELB.  That was certainly true of the financial crisis. 
Further, in view of how slowly our balance sheet normalization has proceeded, if ELB 
events occur with the frequency reported in the memo, we run the risk of an inordinately large 
balance sheet and the political-economy problems that would likely ensue.  Thus, the limited 
benefits of an extensive use of LSAPs do not seem to me to outweigh the potential costs. 
In summary, the memo lays the groundwork for the start, I think, of a very important 
policy discussion.  On the basis of the staff’s analysis, I believe we will be best served by 
strategies that facilitate the use of normal interest rate policies augmented by forward guidance.  
Facilitating the use of interest rate policies may eventually require the adoption of a higher 
inflation target or, again, potentially employing negative interest rates. 
Forward guidance is another useful policy tool that may be even more effective in the 
future now that the public has significant experience with it.  They understand how we used it, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
23 of 219


 
 
 
and they have some confidence, after what they learned through the crisis.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thanks to the staff for putting together 
this excellent memo that summarizes the state of affairs on the effectiveness of various 
unconventional policy tools.  I’m going to organize my comments into four areas.  First, a little 
bit about the probabilities of returning to the ELB.  Second, quite a bit on the effectiveness of 
tools.  Third, a brief comment on additional tools that were not discussed.  And then, finally, 
should the Committee evaluate alternative monetary policy strategies? 
On the question of the probabilities of returning to the ELB, I think these are interesting 
calculations but only as a very rough guide.  We cannot expect that we can pin down a 
reasonably sharp estimate of a probability like this.  Any estimate is going to be model 
dependent, and even within a model class, estimates will be highly uncertain.  At best, I regard 
these probabilities as a rough guess of what we may face in the future.  But a question from my 
point of view is, does it really matter what the probability is?  A risk-management perspective 
might suggest that all that really matters is that the probability is not zero.  And it is clearly not 
zero. 
The Committee faces a decision tree with two branches, and one of the branches involves 
policy rates back at the ELB levels.  The Committee can and should have a plan in place 
preparing for a period at the ELB in the future, regardless of the perceived probability of getting 
to that state. 
Does the Committee have such a plan in place?  I think we do.  Current private-sector 
expectations of what we would do during a future ELB episode would likely be informed by 
July 31–August 1, 2018
24 of 219


 
 
 
former Chair Janet Yellen’s Jackson Hole speech of several years ago, which I interpreted as 
laying out how the Committee would likely react if a sufficiently negative shock occurred that 
caused the policy rate to return to the ELB.  The speech argued that the Committee had enough 
tools through forward guidance and quantitative easing to handle an ordinary recessionary shock. 
Are private-sector expectations of such a plan important?  And here I agree with Thomas 
Laubach and Vice Chairman Williams.  I think that private-sector expectations are quite 
important.  The private-sector expectation of FOMC action would mitigate the bad shock even 
before any action is taken by this Committee in response to the shock.  This effect may even be 
large enough to keep us away from ELB—although any estimate of this type of effect is, of 
course, very uncertain. 
In my view, an update of the former Chair Yellen’s speech might reinforce currently 
existing expectations of what the Committee would do in the event of a recessionary shock and 
have the added benefit of mitigating the effects of such a shock on the economy. 
Let me turn now to the effectiveness of tools.  There’s a long-running academic debate on 
the effectiveness of both QE and forward guidance.  This debate is unlikely to be resolved any 
time soon.  The Committee will simply have to track developments in this ongoing debate and 
revisit on occasion. 
The forward-guidance debate has been dominated by ideas about the forward-guidance 
puzzle.  Many top authors in the field have discussed this issue and published papers.  There is 
no clear resolution, in my reading of the literature.  I think that the forward-guidance puzzle 
reveals fundamental weaknesses in New Keynesian theory.  Basically, the forward-guidance 
puzzle is that forward guidance works phenomenally well inside a model—implausibly well.  
The expectations effects are too large for events promised in the distant future.  Paradoxes like 
July 31–August 1, 2018
25 of 219


 
 
 
this often suggest fundamental rethinking of theories.  So I think we just have to wait and see 
how this proceeds over the next few years. 
I think it’s clear we can’t resolve such issues here.  The best we can do is be aware that 
these debates are proceeding and that we should not be fooled into overstating what forward 
guidance can do.  I think I’m echoing some of the comments just made by President Harker. 
On quantitative easing, what about the effectiveness of QE?  Here, again, there’s a long 
research debate—one that is unlikely to reach a clear resolution any time soon.  But here’s my 
own take:  First of all, we don’t have an accepted theory of quantitative easing.  What we do 
have is a set of stylized facts based on the general experience of the ECB, the Bank of Japan, and 
the Federal Reserve. 
The stylized facts are as follows.  Major effects do occur, centered in financial markets, 
especially equity prices and foreign exchange markets.  Very large effects are observed during 
the run-up to key decisions, especially when the probability of action was initially thought to be 
zero but then eventually moves toward 100 percent.  I have three examples in mind.  The first is 
the United States in the run-up to the QE2 decision during the fall of 2010.  During the summer 
of 2010, it was thought that the Committee would not move in this direction, but by the time it 
got to November, that probability had moved to 100 percent. 
The second is the BOJ in the run-up to the appointment of Haruhiko Kuroda during the 
winter–spring of 2012–13.  Again, during the fall of that year, it was thought that the BOJ would 
take no action at all on this kind of dimension, but by the time Governor Kuroda was appointed, 
the probability was considered to be 100 percent. 
And the third is the ECB in the run-up to the generalized asset purchase program in the 
spring of 2014 up to January 2015.  Again, for the ECB’s case, the ECB was viewed as not 
July 31–August 1, 2018
26 of 219


 
 
 
having any probability at all of taking unconventional policy actions during the early part of 
2014, but by the time you got to the actual decision in January 2015, that probability had moved 
to 100 percent. 
During these run-up periods, the key effects are clear.  There’s a large depreciation of the 
domestic currency—on the order of 20 percent, depending on which episode you’re looking at.  
There are important equity price increases in all three cases.  There is some effect on longer-term 
bond yields, but it is much more muted.  There’s even less effect on inflation and inflation 
expectations—plausibly, you could argue there’s no effect at all on inflation.  And then the 
effects on the real economy are very hard to disentangle, without having a good theory of how 
QE works. 
So I would summarize the state of affairs for QE as, something happens but not in a way 
that is easily reconciled with standard macroeconomic theories that we like to work with.  And I 
would stress that the large equity price effects and foreign exchange effects sound like standard 
monetary policy easing, only much larger than what we’re used to from most policy rate moves 
that we would consider. 
To academics and others who say there are no effects from quantitative easing, I would 
say, “You’re not paying attention.”  These are the “QE facts” that a satisfactory theory has to 
confront.  We don’t have such a theory, but I think we need to keep these facts in mind and ask 
ourselves, for those who are arguing either one side of the debate or the other, whether their 
theories are addressing these facts. 
Where does this leave the Committee?  I would say forward guidance is in a bit of 
disrepute because of the forward-guidance puzzle.  If we’re forced back to the ELB, we will 
likely have to turn to quantitative easing, as imperfect as it is, and I think we should probably be 
July 31–August 1, 2018
27 of 219


 
 
 
more assertive than we have been in creating policy space on the balance sheet in order to 
prepare for this possibility.  This augurs against our current policy, which only slowly reduces 
the size of the balance sheet.  I think we should think more strategically about this issue. 
Let me just turn to a few policy tools that are not mentioned.  President Harker did 
mention negative policy rates.  I personally do not see this as very effective, but many countries 
have now done this with some effect, and I think if we return to the ELB, we’ll be pushed very 
hard on this issue.  So I think we should have that as part of the analysis.  If we want to say no to 
negative policy rates, we should have good reasons why we’re going to say no, whereas other 
countries have said yes. 
There is also the sticky question of other types of purchases other than U.S. Treasury 
securities or mortgage-backed securities.  In Japan, they regularly buy ETFs that concentrate on 
equities.  I think there could be political pressure to go toward other types of assets.  Certainly, 
Europe has gone toward other types of assets.  So, again, I think it’s unpopular here in the United 
States—but if we don’t want to go to other types of assets, then we should be prepared to answer 
this question and give a good analysis about why we don’t want to go in that direction. 
Finally, should the Committee evaluate alternative monetary policy strategies?  Yes, and, 
like others, I think a regular review is a good idea.  I like the Bank of Canada’s standard on this 
question.  Their policy framework is evaluated every five years or so and preferably outside the 
hubbub of day-to-day policymaking—perhaps at a special meeting of several days in which the 
Committee would give careful thought to this question. 
I have several brief comments on this.  A lot of times, this is framed as whether we want 
to change the inflation target or not.  I think any change in the inflation target is unlikely to work.  
A change in the inflation target would undermine the credibility of the inflation target, so it 
July 31–August 1, 2018
28 of 219


 
 
 
would disturb the primary benefit of having an inflation target in the first place.  It would upset a 
global standard that has been established over the past 25 years, and I think it would likely set off 
a global free-for-all with lots of inflation target changes globally.  We’ve seen that kind of 
situation occur in the 1930s and possibly again in the 1970s.  So I think you probably don’t want 
to break this international standard. 
I think a better way to frame the debate is via the price-level targeting or nominal GDP 
targeting debate.  What I like about those kinds of frameworks is that they are optimal in a wide 
variety of macroeconomic models.  That gives me some confidence that we’re not getting 
something that’s model-specific.  If you don’t want to read those papers, I think the simple 
answer about why they’re good is that they pin down expectations better than other types of 
policies. 
Also, I would note that we are not behaving like price-level targeters today.  And, in my 
mind, that suggests that a review is warranted.  Some of you have heard me make this point 
before.  Between 1995 and 2012, we arguably followed a de facto price-level targeting policy in 
which inflation was sometimes above target and inflation was sometimes below target, but, on 
average, we stayed on a 2 percent price-level path. 
Since 2012, we’ve moved off that path and by a substantial margin—about 4½ percent 
off the price-level path.  And this makes me think that we’re no longer behaving as de facto 
price-level targeters.  And, possibly, we have moved away from what would otherwise be more 
closely aligned with the optimal policies that come out of our models. 
So I do think it’s very much warranted that we would have a broad discussion on these 
issues, but that discussion should take place in a setting that would be divorced from the day-to-
day policymaking.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
29 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Thank you for scheduling this important 
discussion, and thanks to the staff for an excellent analysis of the policy environment at the 
effective lower bound.  I found the staff paper an outstanding refresher for thinking about the 
policy options that will best help the Committee achieve our dual-mandate goals, taking into 
account the prospective constraints posed by the ELB.  The model analyses are state of the art.  I 
don’t mean they are the last word on any of these issues, but this is the kind of work that should 
inform our best policy thinking. 
Now, in response to the first question, yes, I am concerned about how the effective lower 
bound may limit our ability to achieve our dual-mandate objectives.  Our challenge is that 
equilibrium real interest rates have fallen over the past 10 to 15 years.  Vice Chair Williams and 
President Rosengren mentioned this.  This has been a global phenomenon for interest rates. 
It’s also due to the substantial decline in potential output growth.  Standard growth theory 
is going to have a relationship between the decline in growth and r*.  The outlook is for r* to 
remain lower than we expected when we agreed on our 2 percent symmetric inflation target.  So 
I think this is a big change and challenge for us from 2012. 
Under our median assessment for the neutral nominal federal funds rate of 2¾ percent, 
we could quite often run out of room to deliver the typical 500 basis point reduction in short-
term policy rates that we have used in the past to mitigate economic downturns.  This was also 
mentioned earlier.  We’d then be forced to turn to alternative instruments to provide monetary 
accommodation.  While I believe these alternatives are effective, they are not close to being 
perfect substitutes for our usual policy instrument, and they are more controversial outside 
economic circles.  The results in the paper regarding the frequency and severity of ELB episodes 
July 31–August 1, 2018
30 of 219


 
 
 
and the efficacy of alternative tools reinforce this assessment.  It’s a reality that we have to come 
to grips with. 
At a minimum, the first conclusion I draw is that it’s critical that we get everything we 
can out of our symmetric 2 percent inflation objective.  We must always act to reinforce the 
public’s understanding that 2 percent is not a ceiling.  If we don’t, our perceived inflation target 
will be lower than 2 percent, making ELB episodes even more frequent and more difficult to exit 
from. 
The staff analysis provides a good deal of food for thought about the second question 
posed to the Committee regarding the effectiveness of alternative policy tools.  My reading of the 
results is that, while not as powerful as moving the federal funds rate, both forward guidance and 
large-scale asset purchases can provide sizable monetary accommodation. 
To be sure, in the simulations it appears that the effects on unemployment may be 
relatively muted, while the effects on inflation are more apparent.  But I can see alternative 
simulations in which all of these effects would be stronger.  Notably, the simulations all assume 
households have backward-looking expectations while price and wage setters are forward-
looking. 
As we know from a large body of New Keynesian research, putting more weight on 
forward-looking expectations will amplify the effect of future policy on the real economy today.  
Indeed, the forward-looking behavior of price setters in the memo simulations likely is a factor 
making the inflation result more powerful. 
There are a whole host of technical factors that weave in and out of this analysis related 
to the forward-guidance puzzle and things like that that are linked to long-term expectations and 
longer-horizon aspects of the models, which we have to grapple with in the analysis.  But in 
July 31–August 1, 2018
31 of 219


 
 
 
terms of how descriptive they really are of what we’re experiencing in the economy, I think we 
have to take some of this with a grain of salt and use judgment there.  I think that that is 
important for us to grapple with. 
This observation highlights the benefits of the public believing our commitment to do 
whatever it takes to fight the disinflationary consequences of the effective lower bound.  Indeed, 
I think the Committee’s adoption of threshold-based forward guidance in 2012 was an important 
ingredient in firming the public’s beliefs that the FOMC would pursue sufficiently 
accommodative policies.  In combination with our open-ended QE3 purchases, threshold-based 
guidance was a powerful declaration that distinguished our efforts from the less forceful 
commitments made by the Bank of Japan in the 2000s and the pre-2014 ECB efforts. 
Credible communications in combination with observable actions are important for 
reinforcing the public’s understanding of our commitment to achieving our dual-mandate 
objectives.  The combination can have a powerful effect on consumer confidence and business 
confidence, which are something of a proxy for forward-looking influences on behavior and, 
with it, the spending decisions of these agents. 
The important role of expectations should serve as a warning as well.  Monetary policy 
can be a powerful tool at the ELB when inflation expectations are anchored in the right place.  
But if inflation expectations fall and are no longer consistent with our inflation objective, our 
future challenges will be much harder.  This is one reason I feel we need to keep emphasizing the 
symmetry of our 2 percent target. 
Finally, should we consider alternative future monetary policy frameworks in light of 
these results concerning the ELB?  I think it is natural and appropriate for us to have periodic 
strategic discussions on this topic even if, in the end, they simply reinforce that our current 
July 31–August 1, 2018
32 of 219


 
 
 
approach is the best we can do.  I think that it is the case that the Bank of Canada has had a 
number of these reviews, but they haven’t really changed anything—though I haven’t studied 
that. 
I would note, though, that none of the alternatives that are on the table, such as price-
level targeting or raising the inflation target, necessarily free us from the use of forward guidance 
or large-scale asset purchases.  Alternative frameworks might lessen the odds of hitting the ELB, 
but they cannot drive the risk to zero.  And whenever we are at the ELB, the question of 
alternative policy tools becomes relevant again. 
I also think it’s appropriate to communicate the outcomes of these discussions in the 
minutes, speeches, and testimony.  Transparency is important here.  But unless we make a 
change in our inflation target, I’m less inclined toward amending the Committee’s longer-run 
goals and strategy statement.  I’m skeptical that simple changes in language could provide 
additional meaningful clarity to the public or improve their confidence in our approach beyond 
their current assessment. 
Now, let me speculate on the central outcome of such monetary policy strategy 
discussions.  I think that the Committee will find that it should select a strategy that locks in a 
commitment to achieving our dual-mandate objectives without blinking an eye in the face of 
difficult circumstances.  That’s a tall order.  Adding a few words to our strategy statement is key.  
It’s taking difficult and controversial actions in the moment that truly proves a central bank’s 
commitment. 
Whatever the precise instruments may be, such an outcome-based approach to policy is 
key.  And in this regard, I believe strongly that credibly reinforcing the symmetry of our 
2 percent inflation objective is extremely important.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
33 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I also thank the Board staff for providing a solid 
memo to kick-start our discussions about policy tools at the effective lower bound.  Although we 
can’t estimate the probability of hitting the effective lower bound with precision, if the 
equilibrium interest rate is going to be lower, then this risk is higher than it has been in the past. 
My thinking is similar to President Bullard’s.  Even if the risks were smaller than 
estimated in the memo, recent experience shows the costs of being at the lower bound can be 
very high.  So it’s not too early to start these discussions to determine the consensus view on the 
tools we’ll use when we confront the situation in the future. 
I agree with the Chair.  I view this discussion of tools as a piece of a larger discussion the 
Committee needs to have about its operating framework—here, I am referring to floor versus 
corridor—and its monetary policy framework—here I’m referring to our current flexible 
inflation-targeting framework versus alternative strategies such as price-level targeting.  The 
efficacy, and even the feasibility, of tools available at the effective lower bound are tied to how 
we decide to operate, and our choice of monetary policy frameworks should reflect our 
assessment of the efficacy of the tools at the effective lower bound and the likelihood of finding 
ourselves there again, which are in turn dependent on our framework. 
Indeed, while assessing the efficacy of tools to use when policy is constrained by the 
lower bound is important, equally important is considering whether there are changes to our 
monetary policy framework that would reduce the chances of encountering the effective lower 
bound or, even within our current framework, asking whether there are better ways of conducting 
policy.  For example, rather than a Taylor-type rule, can policy be guided by a rule that 
July 31–August 1, 2018
34 of 219


 
 
 
approximates the optimal rule in a low equilibrium interest rate world that lowers the probability 
of hitting the lower bound and is robust across alternative models? 
Regarding the tools, I think there was a considerable amount of learning by doing in 
addressing the Great Recession.  And in the end, both asset purchases and forward guidance 
were reasonably effective at providing policy accommodation.  But I don’t think we should 
overestimate their effectiveness in the future. 
The memo’s estimates of their effects on unemployment and inflation are relatively 
modest.  And, as the memo indicates, there is considerable uncertainty associated with such 
estimates.  Additionally, the use of asset purchases may face some limits in the future.  Our 
choice of operating procedure will determine the normal size of our balance sheet.  If the balance 
sheet grows too large, we may run into constraints, both political and operational, in using this 
tool. 
We’ve already seen some public “pushback” against IOER.  It’s not difficult to imagine 
similar types of “pushback” against large-scale asset purchases.  On the other hand, with no limit 
on the size of the balance sheet, we open ourselves up to requests to aid other industries or use 
the balance sheet to fund government initiatives, as occurred during and since the crisis. 
Operationally, while the staff memo suggests limits won’t be binding, I think it’s 
reasonable to ask whether, in a world of rising federal deficits, increasing the stock of Treasury 
securities held by the public and perhaps pushing up term premiums, the Fed would need to buy 
a greater amount or share of Treasury securities and perhaps MBS to get the same effects as 
during the Great Recession episode.  Or would our purchases need to be scaled up according to 
the size of the outstanding stock of securities? 
July 31–August 1, 2018
35 of 219


 
 
 
Regarding forward guidance, I find it helpful to think of two types of guidance.  Away 
from the lower bound are guidances that are intended to convey information about our reaction 
function and the rationale for our policy decisions.  This type of forward guidance is in the realm 
of transparency and policy communications. 
The other type of forward guidance is meant to be used as a policy tool to provide 
accommodation once our interest rate tool is constrained.  To be fully effective, the public must 
understand that the central bank is setting policy differently than it would if interest rates were 
not constrained.  And they need to believe that the Federal Reserve is committed to 
implementing this different policy over what could be an extended period, even after the 
economy has improved. 
Now, the forward guidance the Committee used following the onset of the Great 
Recession evolved over time from qualitative guidance to calendar-date guidance to economic 
thresholds and to a blend of state-contingent and date-based guidance.  The one constant was that 
the Committee stopped short of making the kinds of commitments that make forward guidance 
work most effectively in our economic models. 
Because of the uncertainty that policymakers face, maintaining some flexibility to depart 
from guidance is likely to characterize monetary policy during these episodes.  Implementing a 
credible commitment is going to be hard for the Committee to achieve.  Time-inconsistency 
problems will be hard to overcome. 
If the effectiveness of forward guidance comes from the public understanding that we’re 
setting policy differently than we usually do away from the lower bound and that we’re making a 
commitment to do so, then it seems worthwhile to continue to work on our policy 
July 31–August 1, 2018
36 of 219


 
 
 
communications and toward more systematic policymaking in order to increase the public’s 
understanding of our usual reaction function away from the lower bound. 
How to increase the credibility of commitments continues to be a subject of economic 
research.  And this is the point at which this topic touches the selection of the policy 
framework—as mechanisms like price-level targeting or nominal GDP targeting increase the 
degree of commitment. 
With regard to other tools, although there was some early consideration of using negative 
interest rates and targeting longer-term interest rates, the Committee judged these were not the 
preferred tools.  That may still be true, but we now have examples of other central banks using 
these tools with some positive effect, and I think it would be useful to reassess whether the 
Committee’s earlier conclusions stand. 
Finally, I support the Committee’s evaluating alternative monetary policy strategies.  As 
a matter of good governance, a central bank should periodically review its assumptions, methods, 
and models.  The economy is doing well, so now seems like an appropriate time to begin the 
discussions. 
Changing frameworks should not be decided on cavalierly, so the evaluation will need to 
be a deep one and will take some time.  But I think it would prove valuable.  Even if we stick 
with our current strategy, we may learn how to implement it more effectively to promote our 
goals of price stability and maximum employment.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I agree with everyone else that we are more 
likely to be constrained by the effective lower bound in the future, because neutral rates in this 
environment will only go so high.  How much it will constrain us is a different and interesting 
July 31–August 1, 2018
37 of 219


 
 
 
question.  I read the staff memo to suggest that for the median event, the policy was actually not 
all that constrained.  There was more constraint in the tail events, but then tail events, almost by 
definition, seem to push us to our limits. 
I do think forward guidance, with flexibility to change that guidance in response to 
events, is a core part of our toolkit and has served us well, and I support it.  I’m not as confident 
that we should count on our balance sheet being a normal part of our toolkit.  Its potential effect 
is still not fully clear to me, and our use of the balance sheet does put our political capital 
significantly at risk.  So I would restrict its use to more extreme scenarios in which we believe 
that it’s critical for us to be seen to do more.  I’m okay with communicating in advance but 
would urge us to be humble and to emphasize that humility in our communications.  We can only 
do our part with the tools we have. 
Most of the staff scenarios suggest even our most aggressive actions only move 
unemployment about 1 percent.  And we might now want to be communicating, as I think 
President Rosengren said, that there are limits to the effect we can have and the importance of 
building fiscal policy capacity that creates some additional potential for stimulus should it be 
needed. 
On the topic of alternative policy strategies, I still feel very new to this debate, and I’m 
open to learning.  I will say I’m nervous about policies that have us precommitting to future 
excess inflation, and I do wonder if they’ll be credible and feasible or if we’d actually live up to 
those commitments in fact. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you to the staff for this excellent 
memo.  I, like everyone else, believe the probability of reaching the effective lower bound is 
July 31–August 1, 2018
38 of 219


 
 
 
much higher than it was in the past.  We’ve talked about some of the reasons why:  aging 
demographics, sluggish productivity—and I would add a third, fiscal policy tailwinds, which I 
think may well turn into headwinds in the years ahead, and which, at a minimum, will reduce the 
availability of fiscal policy in the next downturn.  I think those are all issues on my mind, and 
they’re all issues that factor into my current thinking regarding our current case of removing 
accommodation. 
I do believe that forward guidance is a key tool that could help us in the future.  I am also 
supportive and open minded that it needs to be explicit and deliberate and also that it may have 
to be different and adapt to tools that are somewhat different than the tools we used in the past.  
And that may include different ways to use our balance sheet, including buying different types of 
assets than we did in the past. 
I do believe that we should be fleshing out alternative frameworks—price-level targeting 
or nominal GDP targeting.  I am supportive of doing a strategic review, maybe taking several 
days to do it, and getting outside advice.  I think it’s good practice and good governance.  It pays 
to be prepared. 
I’m also supportive, if we were to consider some of these alternative frameworks, of 
having sort of a shadow tracking of nominal GDP targeting and price-level targeting—which I 
think we’re starting to do, but like we do with the Taylor rule—so we can start to learn how they 
might affect our decisionmaking and get some practice with that.  I think that would be a good 
action. 
I’m very mindful of the fact that the next downturn is, for better or worse, going to likely 
be different than the one we just went through.  The causes may be different, the facts will be 
July 31–August 1, 2018
39 of 219


 
 
 
different, and certainly the fiscal and structural policies that are in force will be different—which 
means we’re going to have to be flexible. 
Several people talked about the fact that, in the previous downturn, there was a good bit 
of experimentation and getting feedback and trying new things, and our processes and what we 
did evolved.  Preparation, I think, is critical.  I do believe, in the next downturn, it’s going to be 
essential to get inputs from the financial sector and the business community—we already do that 
through individual banks—to make sure we have in place mechanisms by which , if we need to, 
we can have brainstorming sessions with the financial sector and the business community, and 
learn about what’s going on, and have forums in which we can brainstorm among ourselves.  I 
do think, again, the range of tools that we’re going to use in the next downturn—we’re going to 
have to accept that it may just be different than we used the previous time, and we’re going to 
have to be willing to adapt and experiment. 
The last comment is—and this was alluded to—Federal Reserve independence is critical, 
but there’s no doubt that we’re going to need political support for our actions in the next 
downturn, particularly if it involves using the balance sheet.  So I think the work that’s being 
done by presidents, Governors, and the Chair to build our relationships on the Hill now, well in 
advance of a crisis—those efforts are essential.  And I think the more work we do on that pre-
crisis, the more effective we will be in our efforts during the crisis.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the staff for what is a very 
clear and accessible memo.  And it’s set up, what I am finding at least to be, a fascinating and 
useful discussion.  Inevitably, the financial crisis is, as much as we want to say we won’t let it, 
receding into the rearview mirror.  So projects like this are really important in order to make sure 
July 31–August 1, 2018
40 of 219


 
 
 
that we don’t lose our institutional knowledge, and that we are keeping our analytical toolkit 
fresh. 
The importance of this discussion is buttressed by the memo’s assessment that the 
probability of hitting the effective lower bound in the future is quite high.  I am concerned about 
that possibility, but probably less so than other members of the Committee.  The memo makes 
clear that the probability of hitting the effective lower bound falls off pretty rapidly with higher 
levels of the longer-run neutral rate of interest.  And as I have mentioned previously, I am an 
optimist when it comes to the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy, particularly over the 
course of the next decade.  As such, I have a relatively high estimate of the longer-run rate 
potential growth rate, compared with, I think, some other members of the Committee. 
My “takeaway” from the staff’s analysis and a reflection on history is that, if faced with 
another recession on a par with the financial crisis, we could expect our former toolkit to be 
moderately effective provided we acted quickly and kept our expectations within reason.  
Forward guidance and LSAPs could play a measurable role in mitigating the macroeconomic 
effects, although, not surprisingly, the recession would still be substantial.  Long-lasting effects 
on unemployment and inflation would be similarly durable.  But in conducting this thought 
experiment, it’s important to consider changes in the post-crisis economic environment that 
would alter how a crisis would play out relative to 2008. 
As both President Rosengren and President Kaplan and, I think, others have noted, on the 
negative side, the capacity for fiscal policy to respond to a deep recession is much more 
constrained now than it was then.  But, on the positive side, the financial system is in a much 
better place, in terms of its capital and liquidity, to absorb such a shock without amplifying it, 
making it unlikely that the next recession will play out quite like the previous one. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
41 of 219


 
 
 
For a transparency and limited discretion—I was going to say “nut,” but someone is 
writing all of this down, so let me say “advocate”—like myself, the most immediate issue that 
was broached by the memo is whether we should communicate in advance our policy framework 
in conditions of the effective lower bound and how clearly and concretely we should do it.  And 
the potential benefits of such an approach are obvious and inherently appealing.  Increased 
transparency and predictability regarding a sensible and clearly articulated framework can 
increase the legitimacy of our actions and decrease uncertainty among market participants, 
improving macroeconomic outcomes. 
The alternative to communicating our framework now is waiting until the next crisis and 
then acting in what might appear to be a reactive and ad hoc basis, even if it’s quite in line with 
what we all kind of expect we are likely to do and, indeed—as Thomas Laubach and others have 
noted—with the likely market expectations, shaped on the basis of past practice, of what we’d be 
likely to do. 
And yet even taking all of that into account, in this instance I think we should be cautious 
about tying ourselves, Odysseus-like, so firmly and publicly to the mast.  Precisely because of 
the changes that several have discussed in both the fiscal and regulatory environments, we have 
good reason to expect that both the origin and the evolution of the next crisis will be at least 
somewhat different from the previous one—and perhaps materially different from the previous 
one—and that may require a different response.  And at least currently, we understand too little 
about exactly how the tools we’re discussing affect the larger economy—as Vice Chairman 
Williams said, we don’t have a Taylor rule for the balance sheet—to be too categorical about 
exactly when and how we will deploy them in the future.  So excess specificity in these 
circumstances could easily be confusing rather than clarifying and close off options to boot.  In 
July 31–August 1, 2018
42 of 219


 
 
 
addition, on the decision to communicate a framework in advance or not, my reading is that the 
staff’s analysis is inconclusive and probably necessarily so. 
In all of the simulations—again, as Thomas Laubach noted—it was assumed that the 
public and markets fully understand and believe the FOMC’s commitment to various rules.  
Would the results have been much different if, in the simulations, the Committee had waited 
until the crisis struck to announce its policy framework?  How much of an advantage does 
announcing the policy framework in advance provide?  And, certainly, on the question of what 
approach to transparency on this issue is appropriate for an independent but democratically 
accountable institution, that would necessarily be outside the scope of the staff’s analysis and 
ultimately left to our honest judgment.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like others, I think we’d be well served to 
consider the likelihood that the effective lower bound could pose limits to the FOMC’s ability to 
achieve its objectives in future economic downturns.  However imperfect our understanding of 
the drivers, the prospect of lower equilibrium interest rates should lead us to evaluate options for 
deploying an effective instrument of monetary policy. 
In terms of the options specifically covered in the staff memo, both forward guidance and 
balance sheet policy should be on the table, I think.  I have more questions about the efficacy of 
large-scale asset purchases in the short run and consider our understanding of the long-run costs 
to be limited.  We also will need to be mindful of the role of communication, considering the 
public’s greater uncertainty about such policies and the related implications for monetary policy 
effectiveness and credibility.  On the other hand, the use of forward guidance seems more 
July 31–August 1, 2018
43 of 219


 
 
 
promising.  Recent research by my own staff shows that forward-guidance announcements 
generally increase economic activity and inflation as well as lower term premiums. 
Beyond these specific policy instruments, I think we should take into account the full 
range of policies available to achieve macroeconomic stability, especially if we face limitations.  
Fiscal authorities certainly play a role here, notwithstanding apparent current constraints, and we 
should avoid being viewed as the only game in town.  Additionally, we cannot afford to 
disregard the role of financial stability tools—historically, the most fundamental mission of 
central banks.  As we’ve come to appreciate, these tools are understandably harder to measure 
and monitor and involve multiple instruments, require cooperation between relevant authorities, 
and generally require longer time horizons relative to monetary policy.  But in a world in which 
the failure of one of our largest financial institutions continues to threaten macroeconomic 
stability, macroprudential and other regulatory rigor will surely be needed. 
Finally, I’m open to the Committee evaluating alternative monetary policy strategies, 
recognizing that the threshold should be a high one for changing meaningfully the Committee’s 
Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I, too, would like to thank the staff for its work, 
and I find its analysis in part 1 of the memo convincing.  I agree that it is prudent to take 
seriously the possibility that the effective lower bound could limit attainment of our goals.  And 
we are more likely to be successful if we have discussed and communicated our intentions well 
in advance of confronting an ELB situation.  So I welcome this discussion and look forward to 
follow-up deliberations in the near future. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
44 of 219


 
 
 
I am convinced that both forward guidance and the use of the balance sheet were 
effective tools during the last ELB episode and have confidence that they would continue to be 
so should the need arise.  Now, I recognize that some argue that the effects may be modest, but 
tools are there to be used.  We should be ready and willing to use them and be thoughtful on 
maximizing their effectiveness.  On this point, I agree with Vice Chairman Williams—we will 
need to be bold, especially because the public’s expectations about our policies are different than 
before the Great Recession. 
As a consequence, I support President Bullard’s suggestion that we consider current 
balance sheet policy in light of the effective-lower-bound responses, and I echo calls for more 
transparent communication about what we do and how our policy differs in normal times from 
when we are at the effective lower bound. 
Regarding the balance sheet, I believe the approach will have to rely heavily on 
prevailing circumstances, and this is a general truth.  How and why we get to the effective lower 
bound will matter for our response.  The choice to purchase MBS as part of the first LSAP was 
not random but, rather, was closely linked to the lack of liquidity in housing markets.  We should 
be open to a wide range of design options in developing a response and think hard about how to 
communicate this.  This will not be easy.  And I lean toward Governor Quarles’s view about 
avoiding specificity, where possible. 
More broadly, I would find value in a conversation about our strategy for easing 
monetary policy, even before the effective lower bound comes into operation.  Should we 
proactively try to avoid reaching the effective lower bound?  In that vein, we may want to decide 
up front whether balance sheet policy or forward guidance will be implemented along with 
July 31–August 1, 2018
45 of 219


 
 
 
interest rate cuts as part of a general strategy for dealing with downturns in economic activity, 
independent of whether we actually hit the effective lower bound. 
It seems inevitable that consideration of the balance sheet as an active policy tool will 
raise questions about the efficacy and feasibility of corridor versus floor systems in the range of 
economic conditions we are likely to confront.  Even if we would prefer to run a corridor system 
in normal times, choosing to use the balance sheet as an active policy tool will generally mean 
suspending the corridor system in particular circumstances.  Like others, I think it would be a 
good idea to come to a resolution on the floor-versus-corridor question and communicate our 
intentions with respect to the operating framework sooner rather than later. 
With respect to the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, I’m 
not a big fan of increasing the long-run inflation target.  But I am open to other alternatives that 
would provide some scope for communicating state-contingent, short-term inflation targets that 
deviate from the long-run target.  Examples of such alternatives are price-level targeting with 
bands, as I discussed in a macro blog series earlier this year, or temporary price-level targeting 
schemes at the effective lower bound, as President Evans and others have discussed.  I think such 
strategies could be a strong enhancement to forward guidance, and I would like them to be 
actively considered.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like others, I am concerned that in a low-
r* environment, we are likely going to be bumping into the effective lower bound, and we should 
be prepared for it in advance, with additional tools. 
I do think that forward-guidance and balance sheet policies should be part of our toolkit.  
I think there’s a lot we don’t understand, as evidenced by the discussion today.  That doesn’t 
July 31–August 1, 2018
46 of 219


 
 
 
mean we shouldn’t consider these in our toolkit.  I think we should continue to study them, but 
keep them ready if we need them. 
One issue that I thought about is—and Vice Chairman Williams touched on this—I think 
forward guidance is most powerful when it’s used sparingly and used powerfully and very 
credibly and we’re really committed to it.  I have concerns, and I would encourage the staff to 
contemplate how the SEP dot plot is interpreted.  Even though we don’t mean it as forward 
guidance, I think it’s interpreted as forward guidance, and it’s basically been forward 
misguidance for much of the past six years.  And I actually think it’s undermining us so that if 
we actually do want to send a signal to markets that this is what we’re going to do and we’re 
going to stick to it, our credibility is a little bit less than it would be if we had not been providing 
this misguidance.  So I would encourage us to think about the SEP in this context. 
Generally speaking, I think communicating in advance about these alternative policy 
tools, without binding ourselves necessarily, will be beneficial.  I think it can add to our 
credibility when we actually turn to it, and it may build some political support if we’ve 
conditioned the public to these tools in advance. 
I’m supportive of having a broader discussion of alternative strategies and frameworks, 
but I am cognizant of the political reality.  At the end of the day, the public has to support us in 
whatever we choose to do.  And if we haven’t built that support in advance, we’re not going to 
end up being effective. 
I’ve said this previously—I don’t think the public will support us raising the inflation 
target.  I’ve heard so many people “push back” on our existing 2 percent target.  I don’t think 
raising the target is a credible alternative.  That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t discuss it as a 
Committee, but that’s a consideration that I’m going to have as we talk about it.  Similarly, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
47 of 219


 
 
 
something like a price-level target—I don’t find it to be credible because I don’t think we would 
actually live with the higher inflation that the price-level target might call for.  We’re going to be 
worried about nonlinearities and high asset prices, just as we are today, and I think we’ll be more 
so if inflation were substantially higher.  So I think it’s worth talking about.  But I don’t find it 
credible, in view of our current concerns. 
Something I do think would be interesting to analyze would be the Bank of Japan’s 
policy, under which it’s actively controlling the term premium.  I think that could actually be 
very powerful, by controlling both the short end and the long end of the curve directly—again, 
not without political risk, but I think it should be on the table for consideration.  But I’m 
supportive of having the discussion in a systematic way.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you to the staff for a really very 
helpful set of analyses. 
The likelihood that we will see more frequent and prolonged episodes with the federal 
funds rate pinned at the lower bound has been a key consideration animating my policy views 
since shortly after I got here, as it appeared increasingly likely that the equilibrium interest rate 
would remain much lower than it was in the decades before the crisis.  And, in fact, you can see 
that evolution of thinking, as distilled in the SEP.  The median participant in the most recent SEP 
expected a longer-run federal funds rate of 2¾ percentage points, which is down sharply from 
the value that we saw just a few years ago, in 2012—the first time that these projections started 
to be collected—when that estimate was at 4¼ percent, which was close to the average value of 
4½ percent that we saw in the decades before the crisis.  That is a large loss of policy space. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
48 of 219


 
 
 
The low neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate 
to buffer the economy and could be expected to increase the frequency or length of periods when 
the policy rate is pinned at the lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below 
target.  And in turn, those frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling 
down private-sector inflation expectations and further compressing policy space.  That’s a 
concern that was articulated also by Presidents Harker and Evans.  That self-reinforcing 
downward spiral is extremely dangerous, as we have seen most vividly in Japan.  Of course, in 
that specific case, there are some special factors at work, too. 
In the U.S. context, the FOMC has cut the federal funds rate, on average, by about 
450 basis points in response to recessions over the past several decades.  Current estimates 
suggest that we now are likely to have a buffer of only 275 to, perhaps optimistically, 325 basis 
points in available conventional policy space—that is, assuming we get inflation expectations 
re-anchored at 2 percent. 
If the frequency and severity of shocks are roughly in line with historical experience, this 
suggests more frequent and protracted episodes with the federal funds rate at the effective lower 
bound.  And in the event of any erosion in inflation expectations associated with those episodes, 
that would further compromise our ability to use conventional tools alone.  This conclusion is 
reinforced by the observation that fiscal policy has been playing a pro-cyclical role in recent 
years, placing a greater burden on monetary policy, and I think both Presidents Barkin and 
Rosengren observed also the likelihood of diminished fiscal policy space in the future. 
The analysis presented by the staff demonstrates that threshold-based asset purchases can 
help improve the effectiveness of policy if the public anticipates quantitative easing or asset 
purchases will be triggered as soon as the lower bound is hit and maintained as an open 
July 31–August 1, 2018
49 of 219


 
 
 
commitment until the thresholds are achieved.  To me, this point bears highlighting.  If, instead, 
as has been the case in every advanced economy that has employed some form of asset 
purchases, there is uncertainty in the mind of the public about what conditions might trigger asset 
purchases and how long the purchases would be sustained, this undercuts, I believe, the efficacy 
of the policy.  And long delays in the deployment of such asset purchases, perhaps because of 
perceived political risks associated with expansion of the balance sheet, add further to the 
public’s uncertainty. 
All told, an inflation-thresholds-based combination policy along the lines suggested by 
the staff seems like a worthwhile approach to consider.  But even under the very strong set of 
assumptions about the predictability and credibility of the threshold-based policy combining 
asset purchases with forward guidance, it’s worth noting that the combined effects of these 
policies are relatively modest, as we were just shown. 
For this reason, I believe it’s prudent to cast our net more broadly as we consider the 
range of options for dealing with the possible loss of conventional policy space, including by 
looking carefully at lessons from other jurisdictions.  In particular, I would recommend that the 
Committee undertake an analysis of temporary price-level targeting and related makeup policies 
that seek to make up for a protracted shortfall from our objectives during a lower-bound episode.  
The economic literature suggests that such policies can be particularly effective in addressing the 
lower-bound constraint, although these policies need to be credible and well anticipated in 
advance and implemented ex post. 
In addition, I’d be interested in seeing some analysis of options that focus on targeting 
interest rates out the yield curve once the federal funds rate is pinned at the effective lower 
bound—perhaps along the lines that were suggested by Presidents Kashkari and maybe Bullard.  
July 31–August 1, 2018
50 of 219


 
 
 
In contrast to quantitative approaches that are lumpy and target pre-specified quantities of 
purchases, progressive yield curve control policies would keep the focus on interest rates, our 
traditional policy instruments, and perhaps could be transitioned and ramped up and down in a 
more continuous manner.  I would be very interested in analysis of how such a policy might be 
implemented, how it could be used in conjunction with forward guidance, and whether there 
would be differential implications for the size of the balance sheet as a result. 
Finally, if indeed there is likely to be an enduring compression in the average size of our 
monetary policy buffer driven by an enduringly lower neutral rate, it would seem irresponsible 
not to at least consider the pros and cons of raising the inflation target to compensate by a modest 
amount.  While I’d be disinclined to consider a move to a 4 percent target, I think it would be 
valuable to discuss the risks and advantages of considering a move to a more modest and perhaps 
more achievable range, perhaps around 3 percent. 
Finally, I’d note that we were asked whether the Committee should evaluate alternative 
policy strategies, including ones that require changing the statement of longer-run goals.  The 
answer to this seems relatively straightforward.  By law, we’re directed to achieve maximum 
employment and price stability.  We should be prepared to evaluate whatever it takes within the 
range of permissible options to faithfully discharge our statutory responsibilities.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  And thank you for a 
really—I’ll go with Governor Quarles here—fascinating, I think is the word you used, round of 
comments.  Really very interesting.  And also thanks to the staff for a nicely done analysis, 
which suggests that we face a material risk of hitting the effective lower bound in a future 
downturn, with the probability as high as 50 percent over the next 10 years.  This assessment 
July 31–August 1, 2018
51 of 219


 
 
 
seems highly plausible to me, as it is corroborated by other research.  Indeed, as long as nominal 
interest rates remain materially lower than pre-crisis levels, that result is quite intuitive.  So it is 
wise to assume, for the purpose of this exercise, that nominal rates will remain low, that the ELB 
will be nearer, and that the possibility of returning to the ELB will be greater than in the past. 
Indeed, the need to think ahead about our policy options when facing the ELB is self-
evident.  And, as I mentioned earlier, right now is the right time to do that, with the economy and 
labor market strong, inflation near our goal, and the risks roughly in balance. 
I want to start by looking back at the Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles 
and Plans that the Committee adopted at our June 2017 meeting, and I’ll quote, “The Committee 
would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its 
balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary 
policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate.”  In other words, we’re 
prepared to use QE again, but only if rate policy isn’t sufficient—that is, if we reach the ELB. 
Let me now turn to some of the results reported in the staff memo.  The simulations 
suggest that forward guidance and asset purchases can help speed up the recovery of the labor 
market and the return to 2 percent inflation if a serious recession does leave interest rate policy 
constrained by the effective lower bound, and that result is in keeping with the view that forward 
guidance and asset purchases were effective in supporting the economy as it struggled to recover. 
Forward guidance reduced uncertainty and lowered the market’s expectation of the likely 
path of our rates.  Asset purchases depressed term premiums, perhaps working in practice if not 
quite in theory.  Together, those two tools lowered rates and improved financial conditions, 
which supported economic activity, lowered the unemployment rate, and pushed inflation 
gradually higher.  It’s hard to say with any confidence the size of these effects, but I suspect that, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
52 of 219


 
 
 
over time, they were meaningful.  And there’s good reason to think that forward guidance and 
LSAPs will be helpful again if the ELB becomes binding and we need them in the future. 
During the recovery, we learned a great deal about how to use forward guidance and the 
balance sheet, and so did market participants.  We are, of course, better positioned to deploy 
these tools expeditiously in a future downturn than we were in 2009 when they first needed to be 
created and then explained to the public.  As Thomas said and others echoed around the table, a 
better understanding of our intentions to deploy these tools when we face the effective lower 
bound should enhance their effectiveness.  In particular, the public now expects that we will 
deploy these tools again during ELB episodes, which is illustrated by results from the Desk 
surveys regarding the expected balance sheet size.  Respondents now expect a markedly larger 
balance sheet in scenarios in which the ELB is binding.  The resulting anticipation effects should 
provide further accommodation when the economy weakens.  So the integration of the balance 
sheet into the macroeconomic model means that the staff analysis is now able to account for 
these effects, just as it has long done in the case of short-term interest rate policy. 
The staff memo also shows, however, that forward guidance and asset purchases are not a 
panacea, as former Chairman Bernanke was fond of saying—and a sentiment that was also 
echoed very broadly around the table.  During the long recovery, the combination of near-zero 
rates, forward guidance, and LSAPs supported a faster return to a healthy economy but, in the 
end, were not sufficient to offset all of the effects of the ELB.  In view of the historically large 
size of the Global Financial Crisis, it was probably not reasonable to expect that they could have 
done so. 
As with the crisis and its aftermath, the simulations illustrate that, even with rather 
aggressive reliance on forward guidance and asset purchases, we may not be able to make up 
July 31–August 1, 2018
53 of 219


 
 
 
fully for the constraints imposed by the ELB.  In addition, the most effective asset purchase 
program discussed in the memo’s recession scenario would bring the balance sheet to a size that 
is well outside our historical experience. 
Finally, and as many of you noted, the effectiveness of both forward guidance and asset 
purchases would depend heavily on the Committee’s ability to make credible, multiyear 
commitments that would effectively constrain future Committees’ choices—a challenging 
assumption, for example, in the case in which the Committee undertakes to hold rates low even 
after unemployment moves below its long-run sustainable rate and inflation looks set to move 
above target. 
To me, then, the main “takeaway” from the staff’s memo and presentation—and one that 
appears to be very generally shared around the table—is that, while our current toolkit remains a 
powerful one, it is prudent to explore ways in which to improve on it in order to enhance our 
ability to deal with severe downturns that threaten an extended stay at the ELB.  And I look 
forward to our forthcoming discussions. 
I do think there’s broad agreement to return to this discussion and to do so in a 
thoughtful, very carefully planned way that will allow essentially all other important 
“stakeholders” to have a chance to provide input.  We need to be patient.  We need to take our 
time in planning and in executing this because it really does go to the fundamentals of what we 
do, and I think we need to be mindful of the broader environment that we operate in. 
Thank you.  Let’s move to item 2, “Financial Developments and Open Market 
Operations,” and we’ll turn to Simon and Lorie for the Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Trade tensions and foreign monetary 
policy developments, as well as continued strong growth momentum in the United 
States, were the major drivers of market developments over the intermeeting period. 
 
2 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
54 of 219


 
 
 
In particular, developments related to perceived escalation in U.S. and China trade 
tensions stood out. 
In the top-left panel of your first exhibit, you can see that on days over the 
intermeeting period on which market attention was focused on negative U.S. and 
China trade headlines, U.S. and Asian equity price indexes declined, with sectors 
most sensitive to trade, such as industrials, underperforming.  These so-called trade-
tension days have also generally coincided with declines in U.S. yields, measures of 
inflation compensation, and commodity prices and with relative dollar strength.  
However, over the intermeeting period as a whole, asset price moves have also been 
influenced by other factors, including strong U.S. earnings and divergent growth 
trajectories in the United States and abroad.  These factors have contributed to the 
increases in the S&P 500 index and net increases in U.S. Treasury yields. 
Market contacts generally note that a large degree of uncertainty remains about 
the future of U.S.–China trade relations, as well as U.S. trade agreements with its 
other major trading partners.  Last week’s announcement by President Trump and 
European Commission President Juncker of agreement on a framework for resolving 
trade issues between the United States and the EU was cited as supporting modest 
equity and yield increases in the United States and Europe.  However, a number of 
contacts focused on wording in the U.S.–EC statement that they viewed as increasing 
the likelihood of a more confrontational approach with China.  Despite the focus on 
potential escalation with China, at this point in time, neither measures of option-
implied skew nor overall implied volatility levels in the case of U.S. equities point to 
higher costs of protecting against adverse effects stemming from trade risks.  In 
explaining this, some contacts have cited a reluctance to enter positions when so 
much uncertainty remains and there is such difficulty in accurately assessing political 
tail risks, as was demonstrated in the cases of the Brexit vote and the 2016 U.S. 
presidential election. 
Analysis of the Desk’s policy survey results has been helpful in underscoring the 
uncertainty surrounding trade policy.  The top-right panel shows the results of a 
natural language processing program run over the responses provided in comment 
boxes in the July surveys.  Conditional on any two-word phrase appearing more than 
10 times in the surveys, the panel shows the proportion of times with which that two-
word combination appears in the same sentence as wording expressing uncertainty.  
As you can see in the results, references to “trade policy” had far and away the 
highest linkage to expressions of uncertainty, with “balance sheet” the second 
highest, a topic that will be discussed in further detail by Lorie. 
Evolving developments in trade policy were the major focus of foreign exchange 
markets over the period, with the trade-weighted dollar rising roughly 1 percent.  As 
indicated in the middle-left panel, the dollar appreciated against almost every 
currency in the index with the exception of the Mexican peso.  The peso strengthened 
roughly 10 percent, reversing much of its weakness over the past two months, as 
contacts perceived a more moderate stance from the new Mexican administration on 
fiscal issues and NAFTA, and U.S. officials suggested an agreement on the latter 
July 31–August 1, 2018
55 of 219


 
 
 
might soon be reached.  Further, Banxico’s June rate increase and heightened 
expectations of further policy firming have also been cited as contributing to the 
strength of the currency. 
The other currency move that stands out is that of the Chinese RMB, which was 
by far the largest contributor to trade-weighted U.S. dollar appreciation over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in the dark blue bars.  The RMB depreciated over 
6 percent against the U.S. dollar and roughly 5 percent against the CFETS basket as 
trade tensions escalated, as shown in the middle-right panel.  For context, the 
depreciation of the RMB was the largest absolute move over a seven-week period 
since the currency’s de-pegging in 2005.  While contacts viewed trade concerns as the 
primary driver, the announcement of monetary policy easing measures in China in the 
context of slowing credit growth and initial signs of weaker economic data were also 
cited as playing an important role. 
With regard to the magnitude of the depreciation, contacts speculated that 
authorities were content to allow the market to direct the course of the RMB and that 
outright FX intervention by the PBOC was limited and not necessary to prevent even 
larger declines, unlike in 2015 and 2016, when $1 trillion of reserves and enhanced 
capital controls were used to stabilize the exchange rate.  Contacts do seem to have 
taken comfort, however, from the belief that the PBOC undertook signaling efforts to 
moderate the pace of recent depreciation, including reassurances by the PBOC 
governor in early July that the authorities were not targeting a weaker currency.  In 
another example of such signaling, a number of contacts also noted that the PBOC set 
the daily fixing rate at slightly stronger levels than certain model estimates would 
suggest, in contrast with a pattern of weaker fixes earlier in the year. 
Levels of implied volatility on the dollar–RMB currency pair have risen to levels 
only notably surpassed in the period immediately following the August 2015 
devaluation.  And dollar–RMB risk reversals have risen markedly since mid-June, 
indicating the cost of protection against further RMB depreciation has increased 
relative to the cost of protection against appreciation.  However, these latter measures 
remain well below levels seen in 2015 and 2016.  Indeed, most market participants do 
not seem overly concerned that the recent RMB depreciation might indicate much 
more to come, in contrast to the situation after August 2015 and January 2016.  
Reasons cited for this confidence include a more clearly communicated and better 
understood PBOC FX framework, a somewhat less fragile financial system following 
the government’s deleveraging campaign, and a more robust global economic 
backdrop. 
That said, some market participants have noted a growing tail risk of rapid 
escalation of trade tensions between the United States and China that could result in a 
much more meaningful move in prices.  A number of market participants have 
pointed to the inability of China to match the United States in the amount of goods on 
which to levy tariffs and noted that nontariff retaliatory measures could affect U.S. 
firms operating in China.  Other potential retaliatory measures could involve 
exchange rate policy or China’s portfolio of foreign assets.  Though market contacts 
July 31–August 1, 2018
56 of 219


 
 
 
view this scenario as highly unlikely, considering that it could impose high costs on 
China itself, including sharply increased capital outflow pressures, it is one that 
would affect global markets very significantly.  The combination of negative growth 
effects of escalating trade tensions, alongside a return to increasing leverage that 
could stem from policy easing, also increases the chance of a hard landing in China, 
which would have global consequences.  Steve will discuss these issues further in his 
briefing. 
Turning away from China, developments with regard to major advanced-economy 
central banks were cited as driving moves in sovereign yield curves.  Net moves in 
German, Japanese, and U.S. sovereign yields over the intermeeting period are 
displayed in the bottom-left panel.  Specifically, the ECB’s introduction at its June 
policy meeting of new forward guidance on its asset purchase program and policy 
rate path drove declines in German and other European yields.  Separately, the 
Japanese sovereign yield curve steepened following reports that the Bank of Japan 
may adjust its operating framework to facilitate an increase in longer-term interest 
rates.  Today the Bank of Japan announced some tweaks to its operating framework 
along with new forward guidance on its policy rates. 
These developments affected U.S. Treasuries as well, with yields declining 
modestly on the day of the ECB announcement and increasing, particularly in longer-
dated tenors, following the initial reports about changes to the Bank of Jaoan’s 
framework.  The steepening in U.S. yields that was observed following the 
speculative reports on the Bank of Japan was in contrast to the flattening in the U.S. 
yield curve that continued over the intermeeting period.  In explaining the moves 
higher in shorter-dated yields over the period, contacts pointed to expectations for 
continued policy rate normalization in the United States.  Contacts cited escalating 
trade tensions as keeping longer-dated yields lower, though structural factors such as 
increased demand from liability-driven investors also reportedly continued to put 
downward pressure on yields further out the curve.  TIPS-implied breakevens were 
little changed in longer-dated tenors, although they narrowed more significantly in 
shorter-dated tenors, despite rising trade tensions.  Contacts attributed the narrowing 
in shorter-dated breakevens to lower oil prices, a view that the inflationary pass-
through of higher tariffs may be limited, and a decline in risk sentiment on trade-
tension days. 
As shown in the bottom-right panel, near-term U.S. monetary policy expectations 
were little changed over the intermeeting period.  No rate hike is expected at this 
meeting, though roughly 95 percent of a 25 basis point rate hike is priced in at the 
September meeting, with 40 basis points of tightening priced in by the end of the 
year.  Despite the focus on intensifying trade frictions, responses to the Desk’s July 
surveys did not indicate that the escalation had a material effect on respondents’ 
expectations for monetary policy, nor did they indicate that recent comments by 
President Trump on interest rate policy had affected their views on the likely path of 
policy.  And broader market commentary was consistent with the view that the 
comments would have no material effect on the Committee’s reaction function. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
57 of 219


 
 
 
Market participants were attentive to the announcement by the Chairman in the 
June press conference that, starting in January of next year, press conferences would 
be held following every meeting.  Including the earlier press reports of such a change, 
the implied federal funds rate path in 2019 became a little smoother in response.  
Lorie will continue the briefing. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Simon.  I’ll begin on exhibit 2 and review recent 
developments in the federal funds market and our assessment of those developments, 
and then conclude with a few operational updates. 
As discussed in the staff memo, the technical adjustment to interest on reserves 
was effective in moving the effective federal funds rate lower in the target range.  As 
shown in the top-left panel, the effective federal funds rate increased 20 basis points 
to 1.9 percent, in line with the 20 basis point increase in IOR.  Other overnight rates 
also rose about 20 basis points, and, as I’ll discuss in more detail, market participants 
appear to have adjusted their expectations of both unsecured and secured rates 
relative to the target range in response to the technical adjustment.  All of these 
developments suggest that the current operating regime and tools remain highly 
effective at controlling short-term interest rates. 
In the days following the technical adjustment, as shown in the same panel, the 
effective federal funds rate unexpectedly rose 2 basis points to 1.92 percent, 
narrowing the spread to IOR to just 3 basis points.  It stayed at this level for a week 
before declining to 1.91 percent, where it remains now. 
The rising effective federal funds rate received significant attention, likely 
because some market commentators suggested that it may have been a result of 
declining reserve balances—in other words, early evidence of reserve scarcity.  
However, the staff’s assessment, formed with the benefit of some hindsight, is that 
the firmness was driven by temporary factors specific to the federal funds market. 
In particular, we saw greater demand to borrow federal funds from a few banks 
that were temporarily willing to pay up to borrow from the FHLBs because this 
source of funding has favorable treatment under the LCR.  At the same time, we 
observed a lower supply of lending in the funds market from FHLBs.  Taken together, 
we saw a decline in federal funds volumes, as shown by the height of the bars 
declining on the left-hand side of the top-right panel, and a shift upward in the 
distribution of traded rates, shown by the red portions shrinking and the gray portions 
growing.  Notably, you can see that a very small change in trading activity could have 
resulted in the effective federal funds rate coming in at a higher level, on account of 
the thin volumes at and above the median rate. 
Meanwhile, as illustrated in the right-hand side of the panel, the distribution of 
Eurodollar volumes by rate was much more stable over this period, reinforcing our 
view that the developments in federal funds were related to factors specific to that 
market.  Recall that FHLBs are the dominant lenders in the federal funds market, in 
July 31–August 1, 2018
58 of 219


 
 
 
contrast to the Eurodollar market, in which the majority of lending is by firms whose 
loans do not provide borrowers favorable LCR treatment. 
The factors driving these developments in June were difficult to assess quickly 
but became clearer in the subsequent days.  The experience underscores the challenge 
that we face in understanding and interpreting market developments during this 
period of declining reserves.  In particular, distinguishing in real time between market 
developments that are transitory or specific to particular market segments versus 
those that reflect a growing scarcity of reserve balances will be difficult. 
Looking forward, to understand how market participants expect key overnight 
rates to evolve, we asked respondents to the Desk’s surveys to provide their forecasts 
through the end of 2019 for the spread between the effective federal funds rate and 
IOER, between IOER and the top of the target range, and between the triparty repo 
rate and the overnight RRP offering rate.  The middle-left panel summarizes some of 
the key findings. 
Respondents expect the effective federal funds rate to continue to narrow to 
IOER, as demonstrated by the gray line approaching the dark blue line.  Relative to 
May, when we last asked about the spread between the effective federal funds rate 
and IOER, respondents now expect it to narrow a little further over the forecast 
horizon.  Nonetheless, they expect the effective federal funds rate to remain within 
the target range throughout the period.  This is due in part to the fact that most 
respondents anticipate at least one further technical adjustment by the middle of next 
year.  As shown by the dark blue line, the median indicates an expectation regarding 
the IOER rate to be 10 basis points below the top of the target range in June of next 
year. 
Respondents also marked down the expected spread of market repo rates over the 
overnight RRP rate by about 5 basis points since May, but, as shown by the green 
dashes, the median expectation is that the repo spread will not change further between 
now and the end of 2019.  This appears consistent with a view that further technical 
adjustments to IOR will also pass through to the repo market and offset any upward 
pressure that might be expected. 
In the surveys, we also asked respondents to rate the importance of factors 
influencing the spread between the effective federal funds rate and IOER through the 
remainder of this year and in 2019.  The median responses are shown in the middle-
right panel.  Similar to May, respondents rated Treasury security supply dynamics, 
the light blue bars, and changes in reserve balances, the dark blue bars, as the most 
important factors.  However, looking ahead, market participants expect reserve 
balances to become a more important factor in 2019, with the median survey 
respondent assigning this factor the highest rating. 
Survey respondents were also asked to forecast the spread between the effective 
federal funds rate and IOER conditional on various reserve balance levels.  Since 
May, nearly all respondents raised their expected level of the effective federal funds 
July 31–August 1, 2018
59 of 219


 
 
 
rate relative to IOER in each reserve balance scenario.  As shown by the diamonds in 
the bottom-left panel, the median expectations for the spread in lower reserve balance 
scenarios rose considerably.  Furthermore, although the median respondent expected 
the effective federal funds rate to equal IOER at a level of $500 billion in reserves in 
May, the median expectation is now that these rates will converge when reserves total 
between $1 trillion and $1.25 trillion.  In order to provide context, in the bottom-right 
panel, we project reserve balances to reach these levels in the second half of next 
year.  These levels, along with the associated survey median spread between the 
effective federal funds rate and IOER, are highlighted by the dashed lines. 
Broadly, I’d say the results from the Desk surveys are consistent with the staff’s 
assessment that a variety of factors will likely exert further upward pressure on the 
effective federal funds rate toward the IOR rate in the coming quarters. 
Like the survey respondents, the staff expects that reserve levels should become 
an increasingly important factor in firming rates.  As can be seen in the staff 
projections of reserve balances, the decline in reserves accelerates once the 
redemption caps reach their maximum levels, with reserves falling at a pace of 
roughly $50 billion per month, owing both to ongoing portfolio runoff and the 
expected growth of nonreserve liability items. 
Similarly, the staff also expects the supply of Treasury securities to exert some 
upward pressure on bill and repo rates, and thus the effective federal funds rate, over 
the rest of 2018, though perhaps not to the extent observed earlier in the year when 
net Treasury bill issuance exceeded $300 billion.  As shown in the top-left panel of 
your third exhibit, the amount of Treasury bills outstanding is projected to fluctuate 
over the remainder of this year, with supply increasing about $75 billion, on net, in 
the fourth quarter. 
One factor that the staff discussed in the memo that was not reflected by 
respondents in the Desk survey relates to expected changes to the FHLBs’ liquidity 
portfolios.  First, the FHFA, which regulates the FHLBs, has informed us 
confidentially of its plans to increase the amount of liquidity that FHLBs are required 
to maintain and to allow them to make a broader range of investments.  This change 
could have countervailing effects on federal funds volumes and the effective federal 
funds rate.  Second, prompted by higher repo rates, the FHLBs recently began 
investigating options for further increasing their capacity to lend in repo, including 
arrangements that would meet their early-day liquidity needs, similar to federal funds.  
While it is difficult to anticipate the full effects of these two changes, on the margin, 
they introduce a greater risk of structural shifts in the federal funds market that could 
lead to lower volumes and put upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate. 
The staff will continue closely monitoring money market developments for any 
signs of changes that could have implications for policy implementation.  At some 
point, an additional technical adjustment to IOR within the target range may be 
needed.  But the staff does not anticipate that this will be the case soon.  While new 
risks may emerge, those related to lower volumes in the federal funds market 
July 31–August 1, 2018
60 of 219


 
 
 
stemming from a significant shift in FHLB liquidity management have been 
presented previously.  Indeed, the OBFR, which is the broad measure of overnight 
unsecured activity that captures both federal funds and Eurodollar transactions, has 
been identified in past work as a potential backup rate to the effective federal funds 
rate.  The OBFR has, to date, been highly correlated with the effective federal funds 
rate and, as shown in the top-right panel, is based on sizable volumes from a more 
diverse set of participants, suggesting that it could be a good alternative policy rate.  
However, there are various legal, operational, and communications matters that 
would need to be fully understood in order to assess accurately the implications of a 
change like this should it be needed. 
That said, we have been working on further enhancing the data collection for the 
production of the OBFR.  Recall that in 2016, we highlighted the fact that a few large 
Eurodollar borrowers changed the way some of their overnight wholesale borrowing 
activity is booked, from offshore to onshore branches.  Earlier this year, another 
Eurodollar borrower reported onshoring such activity.  As you can see in the dark 
blue area, the Eurodollar volumes underlying the OBFR have fallen, in some part 
related to these changes.  A Federal Register notice was issued in mid-May to 
provide revised reporting instructions to capture this activity.  We expect that a final 
notice will be published during the upcoming intermeeting period, with the reporting 
change to be implemented in October and the expanded data set added to the OBFR 
in mid-to-late 2019. 
I’ll conclude with a few operational updates.  As shown in the middle-left panel, 
overnight RRP take-up remained low.  Market participants continue to cite the 
availability of alternative investments at more attractive rates as the principal driver 
of low take-up. 
Regarding the middle-right panel, staff projections continue to indicate that 
principal payments received from agency MBS holdings will fall below the 
redemption cap and that reinvestment purchases will cease in October.  As discussed 
at the June meeting, after SOMA MBS principal receipts fall below the cap, the Desk 
will conduct monthly small-value purchases of up to $300 million.  In order to 
communicate these plans, we intend to publish a Desk statement and FAQs in mid-
September. 
Around this time, the Desk also intends to communicate plans with respect to the 
FHFA’s Single Security Initiative, which is expected to be implemented in June 2019 
and result in new trading conventions in the agency MBS TBA market.  Most agency 
MBS are traded in the TBA market, in which the seller decides which securities to 
deliver to the buyer just before settlement, rather than at the time of the trade.  This 
market currently features separate contracts for MBS issued by Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac.  The Single Security Initiative will allow Fannie and Freddie MBS to be 
deliverable into a new common TBA contract called Uniform MBS, which the FHFA 
expects will save taxpayer money by eliminating inefficient origination costs and 
enhance overall market liquidity.  Absent any objections from the Committee, the 
Desk would communicate its plans to be operationally ready to transact in UMBS and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
61 of 219


 
 
 
would indicate that it may convert some of the SOMA’s existing holdings—
specifically, Freddie Mac securities—where appropriate, to align with UMBS for 
operational efficiency.  In advance of any announcement, we will circulate a memo 
describing these details. 
Lastly, the Desk plans to test Treasury bill operations in the coming weeks.  The 
purchase operation is anticipated for August 16.  The Desk will then conduct tests of 
rollovers and sales of bills and allow some of the purchased securities to mature.  The 
timing of these subsequent tests will depend on the maturity of the securities 
purchased.  While the exercises are consistent with standard practices, they may 
generate attention, as the Desk has not purchased bills since 2006 as well as the 
increased focus on declining reserve balances. 
As usual, the appendix contains a list of all of the small-value exercises conducted 
over the intermeeting period, along with a list of upcoming exercises.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman.  We would be happy to take any questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Questions for Simon and Lorie?  President 
George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Lorie, you mentioned the FHLB liquidity requirements.  What is the 
expected implementation time frame for that? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think the information that we’ve received is that they would need to be 
compliant by the end of 2019.  I think they may start making adjustments either in advance or in 
the early part of 2019, so we might start to see some of those developments.  But I think the 
expectation is to be finished by the end of 2019. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Other questions for Simon and Lorie?  If not, I suggest that we 
break—oh, sorry.  
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  This is my big role. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Your big role.  Okay.  Before we break for lunch, we need a 
vote to ratify the domestic open market operations conducted since the June meeting.  Do I have 
a motion to approve? 
July 31–August 1, 2018
62 of 219


 
 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Thank you.  And now we break 
for lunch.  And why don’t we come back at 10 minutes of 1:00, if we could.  Thanks very much. 
[Lunch break] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  Let’s now turn to the review of economic and financial 
developments, including financial stability.  David Wilcox, over to you. 
MR. WILCOX.3  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the materials titled 
“Material for Briefing on the U.S. Outlook.”  In order to deal with the incipient risk 
that “Miller Time” might otherwise come at about 10 minutes to 3:00, I’ve 
quadrupled the length of my prepared remarks.  [Laughter] 
We continue to assess that the economy is operating somewhat beyond its 
sustainable level and is likely to move further beyond it during the next couple of 
years.  As a whole, the data that have become available since the June Tealbook have 
been a little stronger in this regard than we expected.  The latest real GDP data have 
far exceeded our expectation.  The BEA currently estimates that real GDP increased 
about 4 percent at an annual rate in the second quarter—the blue dot in panel 1 of 
your first exhibit—¾ percentage point above our June forecast.  However, a large 
portion of the upward surprise was in net exports, and we expect much of the bump 
from that source to be unwound over the second half of the year.  For 2018 as a 
whole, our forecast of real GDP growth is 3 percent, 0.2 percentage point higher than 
in June.  I should note that Friday’s historical revisions to real GDP growth, which 
are not folded into this exhibit, were relatively small and likely will have only minor 
implications for our projection. 
The June employment report pointed to a continued strengthening in labor market 
conditions that also was broadly in line with our expectations.  The June data on 
payroll employment came in a little stronger than we had expected.  Panel 2 plots the 
BLS’s estimate of private payroll gains, the red line, along with an estimate that we 
construct using ADP’s payroll processing data, the black line.  A statistical exercise 
that combines both of these pieces of information yields an estimate of June private 
payroll gains of 220,000, the blue line, that is well in excess of the pace that we judge 
to be consistent with no change in resource utilization.  I am inordinately proud, by 
the way, of the ADP franchise, so if any of you have questions on that, I would 
especially welcome those.  [Laughter] 
We receive the July employment report this coming Friday.  The ADP data that 
are available thus far—through the first three weeks of the month—suggest that 
private-sector hiring remained solid, with a point estimate for an increase of another 
 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
63 of 219


 
 
 
200,000 in July.  In the survey of households, the unemployment rate increased two-
tenths in June to 4 percent, rather than edging down as we had expected.  However, 
the June increase reflected a jump in the number of people entering the labor force 
that also resulted in an unexpected rise in the participation rate.  Together, the 
unemployment and LFPR surprises added up to an employment-to-population ratio 
that was in line with our June Tealbook projection. 
Putting all this information together, and as shown in panel 3, we estimated in the 
July Tealbook that the output gap, the black line, had increased to 2 percent in the 
second quarter.  We derived this estimate of the output gap by judgmentally 
synthesizing a wide range of information bearing on resource utilization, including 
data on spending and production, labor market conditions, and inflation.  Our 
judgmental estimate is also informed by results from a set of models that estimate the 
output gap using similar sorts of data.  The output gap estimate from our currently 
preferred model of this type is given by the blue line in panel 3.  Broadly, the model 
concurs that economic activity is running modestly above its sustainable level at 
present.  Although the model currently estimates the output gap to be slightly 
narrower than does the staff, the staff’s judgmental estimate lies well within the 
model’s 70 percent confidence interval.  Like our judgmental estimate, the model’s 
view of the current level of the output gap has changed little in response to the data 
that became available between the June and July Tealbooks. 
Panel 4 provides a different perspective on resource utilization—and over a 
longer period—by plotting the actual unemployment rate, the black line, together 
with our judgm.ental estimate of its natural rate, the green line, and the natural rate 
estimate from the same statistical model used in the preceding panel, the blue line.  
The contour and current level of the two natural rate estimates are similar, with both 
implying that the natural rate has drifted lower as the labor market has continued to 
improve.  Currently, the actual unemployment rate is close to the lower end of the 
model’s 70 percent confidence interval for the natural rate, the blue shaded region.  I 
would note, by the way, that the model does incorporate a Phillips curve, so along 
with all of the other information that it’s factoring in, it does attempt to make sense of 
the incoming data on price inflation. 
We continue to anticipate that real output will rise faster than potential through 
2019; in 2020, we expect output growth to slow to a pace about in line with its 
potential, partly because our baseline forecast continues to assume that the stance of 
policy will shift from accommodative to somewhat restrictive, and partly because 
some supply constraints emerge.  The unemployment rate—the black line in 
panel 5—is expected to reach 3½ percent by the middle of next year and then to 
remain at that level, which is 1¼ percentage points below our estimate of its natural 
rate, over the remainder of the medium term. 
As shown in panel 6, the continued improvement in labor market conditions has 
been broadly shared across racial and ethnic groups.  At present, the three-month 
moving-average unemployment rate for each group lies at or below the lows that 
were achieved during the previous expansion.  In the case of African Americans, the 
July 31–August 1, 2018
64 of 219


 
 
 
comparison to their experience just before the Great Recession is quite striking.  The 
quarterly average unemployment rate for African Americans in the second quarter of 
this year was 6.3 percent.  On the eve of the financial crisis, the lowest quarterly 
average rate attained by that group was 7.9 percent.  This result reflects a continuation 
of the high-beta phenomenon that I have described previously to this Committee.  
Over the most recent four quarters, the unemployment rate for Asians declined 0.4 
percentage point relative to the comparable period four quarters earlier, the rate for 
whites declined 0.5 percentage point, the rate for Hispanics declined 0.6 percentage 
point, and the rate for blacks declined 1 full percentage point.  Nonetheless, as is all 
too evident from the chart, the relative positioning of the unemployment rates remains 
stubbornly entrenched, with the unemployment rate for blacks averaging 2¾ 
percentage points more than the rate for whites in the second quarter of this year.  In 
addition, it seems that there is every reason to believe that when the next recession 
hits, the differential between unemployment rates will widen back out again. 
On the next page of exhibits, panel 7 shows three measures of labor compensation 
growth that we follow.  I’ve omitted the measure of comp per hour that is published 
in the Productivity and Costs release because we don’t yet have updated data 
reflecting last week’s comprehensive revision of the national income and product 
accounts.  We tend to put the most weight on the ECI, the black line, in part because 
it’s less noisy than the other measures.  This morning, the ECI for June was 
published, and it implied a 12-month change of 2.9 percent, right on our forecast.  We 
continue to see the recent behavior of the ECI as broadly consistent with an 
increasingly tight labor market, relatively well-anchored inflation expectations, and 
the lackluster productivity gains seen in recent years.  Because compensation growth 
has continued to attract a lot of attention, I’ve updated in panel 8 a decomposition of 
compensation growth that we’ve shown several times in the past.  This decomposition 
is based on a relatively standard wage Phillips curve model in which nominal ECI 
growth is related to long-run expected price inflation, trend productivity growth, and 
labor market slack.  The twist this time around is that we estimated the coefficients of 
the model using only data through 2009, so I haven’t “stacked the deck” as much as 
usual by letting the model know about how compensation would evolve during the 
current expansion period.  According to the model, the downward pressure on 
nominal wage growth that has resulted from slack conditions in the labor market—the 
gray bars—has steadily diminished as the labor market has tightened.  However, that 
boost to wage growth has been largely offset by a deceleration in trend productivity, 
the red bars, that has yielded only a small net increase in hourly compensation growth 
over this period.  These results underscore all over again the urgency of reviving U.S. 
productivity growth. 
This morning we also received the BEA’s estimate of PCE prices through June.  
Over the 12 months ending in June, top-line PCE prices increased 2.2 percent, and 
core prices rose 1.9 percent.  The estimate for core inflation was in line with our July 
Tealbook estimate, which is shown in panel 9; the data shown in the exhibit again do 
not reflect this morning’s release or last week’s historical revisions.  The estimate for 
top-line inflation rounded to one-tenth below our forecast; however, on an unrounded 
basis, the shortfall was only 3 basis points. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
65 of 219


 
 
 
We are still very much in the process of reviewing the implications of the annual 
revisions for the inflation outlook.  On the whole, those implications look likely to be 
small, with the most notable exception being some hints that the BEA may have 
succeeded in reducing the residual seasonality that had caused inflation rates early in 
the year to run a little higher than average.  Looking ahead, we expect the 12-month 
change in the core index, the red line, to remain at or slightly under 2 percent through 
the end of this year; by that time, total PCE inflation, the black line, is projected to be 
running at about the same rate as the core after having been temporarily boosted by 
gains in consumer energy prices. 
Finally, our medium-term inflation outlook—summarized in panels 10 and 11—is 
essentially unrevised relative to June.  In particular, by 2020, core inflation is 
projected to reach 2.1 percent as resource utilization tightens further and trend 
inflation drifts slightly higher.  Total PCE price inflation is expected to run one-tenth 
below core inflation in 2019 and 2020 as a modest projected decline in oil prices over 
the medium term feeds through to consumer energy prices.  Steve will continue our 
presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.4  Thank you, David.  I’ll be referring to the materials titled 
“Material for Briefing on the International Outlook.”  Like thousands of other 
Washingtonians, I spent a week at the beach earlier this month.  While sitting on the 
sand and watching the people go by, my pallid skin slathered in number 70 sunblock, 
I mused about how one might identify the Federal Reserve economist in the crowd.  
Certainly, one giveaway might be reading this five-pound, 800-page tome, Clashing 
over Commerce:  A History of U.S. Trade Policy.  [Holds up book]  But, in my 
defense, the book was written by a former member of the Division of International 
Finance, Doug Irwin, who left here in 1991, I suspect, because there wasn’t enough 
going on to keep a trade economist occupied.  [Laughter]  Those times have changed.  
And I found the book, especially the chapter on the 1930 Smoot-Hawley tariff, to be a 
great way to put the current trade issues in perspective. 
Regarding slide 1 of the exhibits, most people’s recollection from their high 
school U.S. history class is that the Smoot-Hawley bill resulted in a massive hike in 
import tariffs that helped deepen the Great Depression.  But it turns out the bill 
boosted average U.S. tariff rates by only about 2 percentage points.  Most of the 
upswing in tariffs between 1929 and 1933 reflected the general price deflation of this 
period.  Because many of the tariffs were expressed in dollars and cents rather than as 
a share of the value of imports, declines in import prices ended up boosting the ratio 
of tariffs to import values.  In fact, the consensus among researchers now seems to 
downplay considerably the role of the Smoot-Hawley bill in causing the Great 
Depression in comparison with other factors, including the monetary policy decisions 
made by your predecessors nearly 90 years ago. 
By comparison with Smoot-Hawley, the tariff hikes being contemplated today are 
both larger and, with the greater openness of our economy, potentially more 
 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
66 of 219


 
 
 
consequential.  As shown in the upper-left panel of slide 2, since the Great 
Depression, average U.S. tariff levels have fallen to nearly rock-bottom levels.  The 
indiscernible rise in the tariff rate for 2018, shown by the blue dot, represents the 
tariff hikes implemented so far this year.  As shown by the blue wedges in the pie 
chart on the right, they apply to only $83 billion in imports, or less than 4 percent of 
total merchandise imports.  But were all the tariffs both implemented and proposed by 
the Administration to go into effect—both the blue and red wedges in the pie chart—
this would boost average tariffs about 5 percentage points, as indicated by the red 
dashed line on the left.  This would eclipse the 2 percentage point hike in the Smoot-
Hawley bill, although the level of tariff rates would still fall well short of its peak in 
the 1930s.  Finally, the Tealbook describes an alternative scenario in which tariff 
rates on all merchandise imports are boosted 15 percentage points, the green dotted 
line on that chart.  In this instance, the average tariff rate rises back to its level in the 
1930s. 
Your next slide examines the prospective effect of these tariff hikes on U.S. 
economic activity as measured by GEMUS, one of our DSGE models, assuming that 
our trading partners retaliate by imposing proportionate tariffs on U.S. exports.  The 
aggregate effect of the tariff hikes implemented thus far is minimal.  Were all of the 
tariff hikes being contemplated to go into effect, the effect would be material, at 
nearly 1 percent on the level of GDP, but hardly catastrophic.  One reason that recent 
tariff announcements have engendered so much angst is that they highlight the risk of 
more expansive actions, such as the 15 percent hike on all merchandise imports 
described in the Tealbook—indeed, this lowers real GDP by a much more 
consequential 4 percent after two years. 
Another reason for the anxiety about tariff hikes is that their effect is so uncertain.  
The 4 percent decline in GDP shown here reflects various factors, including the effect 
of higher costs and lower profits on corporate investment, reduced household 
spending as real disposable income declines, monetary tightening in response to 
higher inflation, and losses in productive efficiency as the economy increases output 
of goods in which we have less comparative advantage.  But because we have such 
limited experience of such large hikes in tariffs and the structural transformations 
they might trigger, there’s no good way to check the model results against historical 
experience.  Finally, a critical factor is not modeled at all:  disruptions to global 
supply chains.  All told, our guess is that the Tealbook simulation may understate the 
effects of such a large tariff hike, but we can hardly be sure of that. 
Now, before we get too carried away, I stress that this is all very speculative.  
Most recently, the Administration and the European Union have agreed to hold off on 
any additional tariff hikes pending further negotiations, and there is also greater 
optimism that a deal on NAFTA may soon be struck.  Thus, trade policies might well 
end up in a better place than many have feared.  But the uncertainties remain 
profound, especially because there are no signs of any easing of trade tensions with 
China. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
67 of 219


 
 
 
Because of these uncertainties, in the baseline Tealbook forecast, we are building 
in only those trade actions that have already been implemented.  Accordingly, our 
foreign economic outlook, as shown on your next slide, is quite benign.  We estimate 
that real GDP growth in the advanced foreign economies, or AFEs, bounced back in 
the second quarter from the transitory weakness in the first, while the EMEs slowed 
following unsustainably brisk expansion earlier.  In the period ahead, aggregate 
foreign growth holds up around its trend pace. 
Your next slide focuses more closely on the AFEs.  Much has been made of the 
weakening tone of the data we’ve been receiving in recent months, and, as shown on 
the left, the black line indicates that we’ve indeed been revising down our forecast for 
growth in 2018.  However, the markdowns have been quite small, totaling only about 
¼ percentage point, and the PMIs and monthly activity indicators for the region are 
still pretty solid.  Accordingly, the forecasts for GDP growth in 2019 and 2020, the 
red and blue lines, have been little changed.  On the right, our forecast model of 
recession probabilities in the AFEs, obtained using economic activity data and 
financial stress measures, is not showing much indication of imminent slowdown. 
Your next slide focuses on an alternative signal of oncoming recession that 
you’ve discussed extensively in recent meetings—the slope of the yield curve.  A 
standard measure of the long-term spread—10-year minus 2-year yields—has often 
inverted in the AFEs before recession, as in the United States.  But also as in the 
United States, most of these spreads are close to inverting again.  But we doubt that 
this is a strong indication that an economic slowdown abroad is becoming more 
likely.  First, as Viktors Stebunovs described in his pre-FOMC briefing last week, the 
term spread is a less reliable predictor of recessions in foreign economies than it is in 
the United States.  Second, recent spreads are likely being depressed by QE and 
heightened demand for safe assets.  These developments have probably reduced the 
term premium and thus affected the ability of yield curves to predict recessions, 
although we acknowledge that the jury is still out on this point. 
To abstract from issues associated with the term premium, your next slide 
presents a near-term slope calculation—measured over the next six quarters or so—
that is similar to the one described for the United States in a box in the June 
Tealbook.  These spreads are lower for the AFEs than for the United States, because 
the Committee is expected to continue raising rates for some time, whereas the pace 
of tightening abroad is expected to be considerably slower.  Does this mean that a 
recession is more likely abroad than in the United States?  That’s not clear.  On the 
one hand, to the extent that slower tightening abroad reflects weaker economic 
momentum, it could indeed be the case that the foreign expansion is more fragile.  On 
the other hand, the delay in, or slow pace of, tightening by some foreign central 
banks, especially those of Japan and the euro area, may be a response to low inflation 
rather than weak economic activity—in which case the low term spread may not be 
all that predictive of future downturns. 
For now, we are putting our money on the second interpretation, but we’re hardly 
sanguine about the outlook for the AFEs.  There is still a good chance that the Italian 
July 31–August 1, 2018
68 of 219


 
 
 
government could shake things up in the euro area, and Brexit will continue to churn 
long after the sun has cooled and humanity has migrated in spaceships to another 
galaxy.  [Laughter]  But the headline risks seem, indeed, more prominent for the 
emerging market economies.  One of these, discussed in your next slide, is that rising 
U.S. interest rates will interact with high debt levels and structural vulnerabilities to 
trigger a widespread EME financial crisis.  As shown on the left, there are some signs 
that the most recent bout of emerging market stresses is easing—capital outflows 
have slowed, and EMBI spreads have moved down.  But if the staff forecast 
materializes, both interest rates and the dollar have further to rise, and this could lead 
to renewed pressures down the road. 
The other big risk for EMEs, addressed in your next slide, was discussed in a 
chapter of the latest QS report on financial stability:  a financial crisis in China.  By 
tightening monetary policy and cracking down on shadow banking over the past year 
and a half, the authorities have managed to curtail the explosive growth of corporate 
credit.  However, although the government now seems to be easing up a bit in the 
face of weakening demand, the risk remains that economic growth could slow too 
quickly and trigger the very crisis the authorities sought to forestall.  In early 2016, 
worries about a Chinese hard landing were enough to roil global financial markets, 
helping to tighten U.S. financial conditions enough to delay an expected increase in 
the federal funds rate.  Were an actual crisis to emerge in China, the effect on U.S. 
markets and economic activity would almost certainly be quite substantial, although 
we judge the U.S. financial system as sufficiently resilient to be able to weather the 
storm.  Rochelle will now continue our presentation. 
MS. EDGE.5  Thank you.  I will be referring to the materials titled “Material for 
Briefing on Financial Stability Developments.”  We continue to judge that adverse 
shocks to the U.S. economy would likely be intensified by the financial system by an 
amount about in line with normal experience.  This assessment reflects current 
elevated asset valuations, moderate household and business debt loads, strongly 
capitalized financial institutions, and low levels of vulnerabilities stemming from 
maturity and liquidity transformation. 
The upper-left panel of your first exhibit plots a composite index that summarizes 
asset valuation pressures and risk appetite for a number of markets, including 
equities, corporate debt, and residential and commercial real estate.  We estimate that 
in the second quarter, this index exceeded the 90th percentile of its historical 
distribution, with no component below its median. 
Regarding specific markets, house prices have accelerated over the past year and, 
as shown in the upper-right panel by the black line, the aggregate house price-to-rent 
ratio has similarly increased.  A measure of overvaluation—which controls for the 
long-run trend in this ratio and would therefore be the difference between the black 
 
5 The materials used by Ms. Edge are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
69 of 219


 
 
 
and red lines—lies well below its level before the crisis but is approaching levels 
reached in the housing cycle peaks of the late 1970s and 1980s. 
The middle-left panel reports capitalization rates—that is, the ratio of a property’s 
annual net operating income to its price—on recently transacted commercial real 
estate properties.  Most of these rates have continued to trend down—indicating 
increased valuation pressures—as property prices have risen further while rent growth 
has remained slow. 
In equity and corporate bond markets—not shown—valuations remain high, but 
they have not stretched further since our last assessment.  In leveraged loan markets, 
valuation pressures have continued to increase, mainly as a result of easier nonprice 
terms.  That is, although spreads on new issues of leveraged loans have largely been 
little changed, borrowers have become riskier and underwriting standards weaker. 
As shown in the middle-right panel—and by the sum of the blue areas in each 
column—relative to last year, a slightly higher percentage of respondents to the July 
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices reported that their 
bank’s standards were currently easier than the midpoint of their range since 2005.  
Additionally, the percentage that saw standards as currently being at their easiest—
the dark blue area of the rightmost bar—was notably higher than last year and rivaled 
levels reached in 2014, when excesses in this sector last appeared to peak. 
The lower panels consider leverage in the nonfinancial sector, starting with the 
business sector, in which leverage—not shown—has been high, particularly in the 
case of risky firms.  Net debt issuance by these firms, shown by the black line in the 
lower-left panel, moved sideways in the second quarter after increasing steadily 
before.  Leveraged loan issuance, the blue portions of these bars, has continued to 
account for all of the net issuance, while risky bond net issuance, the green portions, 
has remained negative.  This divergence in risky loan and bond issuance reportedly 
reflects the floating-rate nature of loans and investors’ demand for such instruments 
in the rising rate environment. 
The lower-right panel reports real household debt balances for borrowers grouped 
by credit score.  Balances for borrowers with prime credit scores, the blue line, 
continued to increase in the first quarter, with balances reaching previous peak levels.  
In contrast, balances for borrowers with near-prime and subprime credit scores 
remained at low levels, comparable with those in the early 2000s.  Because borrowers 
with prime credit scores, and historically high repayment rates, have been accounting 
for an increasing share of household debt, we view the credit quality of household 
debt as being solid.  In the stress-test analyses reported in the special topic memo on 
household leverage, this compositional shift is the main reason why household debt 
default rates—under adverse economic conditions—rise to lower levels than in 
previous years.  That said, under such adverse conditions, defaults are still expected 
to increase substantially, which leads to our overall “low to moderate” assessment of 
the vulnerabilities associated with household leverage. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
70 of 219


 
 
 
Your next exhibit considers vulnerabilities in the financial sector, starting with 
insights on banking-sector leverage gathered from the Federal Reserve Board’s 
annual supervisory stress tests.  Considering first the scenarios, the upper-left panel 
reports the maximum changes for the unemployment rate, the black line, and 
commercial real estate prices, the red line, in the severely adverse scenario for each 
stress-test round, starting with the 2014 exercise.  Reflecting the scenario design 
framework in which stresses increase as the economy improves, this year’s scenario 
featured a more sizable increase in the unemployment rate.  Additionally, reflecting 
the assumption of a major unwind of current stretched valuations—like those I 
discussed in exhibit 1—this year’s scenario featured more sizable declines in asset 
prices.  The scenario also featured a steepening of the yield curve resulting from a 
decline in short-term interest rates. 
The upper-right panel shows selected results from the 2018 and recent years’ 
stress tests, broken out for large internationally active banks and other CCAR banks.  
This year’s scenario led to larger projected losses—the orange bars—reversing the 
trend of decreasing losses seen in previous years.  The scenario’s steeper yield curve 
boosted net interest margins and, thereby, pre-provision net revenue, the green bars, 
which offset some of the scenario’s effect on banks’ pretax net income, the purple 
line.  However, because long-term Treasury yields did not fall in the scenario, large 
banks saw larger mark-to-market losses on securities, which flowed through to capital 
via the accounting concept known as “accumulated other comprehensive income,” or 
AOCI—the red bars.  The 2018 stress tests implied sizable declines in bank capital.  
However, reflecting banks’ current high levels of capital, banks—even after enduring 
the stress tests’ severe scenario—appeared to remain strong enough to continue 
lending. 
Regarding other entities, leverage appears moderate for insurers and broker-
dealers but somewhat elevated for the hedge fund sector.  The black line in the 
middle-left panel plots average gross notional leverage across hedge funds as derived 
from the SEC’s Form PF data.  This measure, which captures the many ways through 
which hedge funds employ leverage across markets but is stale, indicates that average 
leverage stepped up in the first three quarters of last year.  In terms of more timely but 
less comprehensive measures, the red line—which captures leverage provided by 
prime brokers typically to finance equities—suggests that gross leverage continued to 
increase through May, though conversations with market participants suggest that, 
more recently, this form of leverage has not been increasing.  Dealers responding to 
the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms reported that 
they have been continuing to ease the terms that they offer to hedge funds—the blue 
and red lines in the middle-right panel—consistent with another theme that we’ve 
been hearing from market participants, which is that dealers are currently very willing 
to provide leverage. 
The lower two panels examine maturity and liquidity transformation.  This 
potential vulnerability remains low for banks, reflecting their substantial liquid asset 
holdings and high core deposit funding levels.  In addition, as can be seen in the 
lower-left panel, which shows cumulative changes in 12-month CD interest rates, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
71 of 219


 
 
 
banks have been able to retain core deposits via relatively moderate increases in 
deposit rates, although steeper deposit increases are more evident in the case of 
smaller banks. 
Vulnerabilities associated with institutional investing in money markets also 
remain low.  As shown in the panel to the right, there has been little appreciable 
growth in MMF substitute vehicles that have similar fragilities to prime funds but 
could attract assets that used to be in prime funds. 
Finally, the table in exhibit 3 provides a time series of our judgmental heat map, 
which we began including in the QS assessment exactly four years ago, and the table 
in exhibit 4 reproduces the detailed heat map given in the July assessment.  Thank 
you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be pleased to respond to your 
questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Questions regarding any of those presentations?  President 
Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  I wanted to ask a question on the trade issue and inflation.  First, I agree 
that I think the scenario could be a lower bound on how bad it could be, in view of the 
interconnectivity of the global supply chain.  My question is a little different, though.  In this 
scenario, monetary policy responds to tariff-induced inflation in the same way as inflation 
induced by excess demand, right?  So it’s acting in the same exact way. 
MR. KAMIN.  Right. 
MR. HARKER.  But I’m not sure that’s quite right.  At least I’ve been thinking about 
this.  In practice, central banks—for example, if there’s an increase in VAT or other consumption 
taxes, you try to look through that—right?—to look for the underlying signals in the economy.  
Now, granted, that’s much harder in this case, because, unlike a one-time event, these are going 
to be dribbling out.  But how do you think about that?  Because what I’m worried about is that 
we see inflation spike.  Some of that, if we get into this scenario, is due to the tariffs, but that’s a 
one-time event.  So how are you modeling that and thinking about that? 
July 31–August 1, 2018
72 of 219


 
 
 
MR. KAMIN.  Well, thank you for that.  We’ve definitely given that issue a fair amount 
of thought.  First of all, we recognize that one possibility is certainly that our monetary policy 
would indeed “look through” a one-time increase in tariffs and its recorded effect on inflation.  
And in that event, of course, the federal funds rate wouldn’t rise.  It would probably fall a little 
bit to accommodate the weaker demand that comes from the other parts of the simulation.  In that 
instance, the negative effect on real GDP is moderated, but it doesn’t go away entirely.  In other 
words, only one part of the total negative effect of the scenario is taken away.  So you still have 
negative effects on real GDP that are pretty substantial. 
But we also considered the possibility that, for a number of reasons, the Federal Reserve 
might not fully look through that price increase.  One of them, of course, is that the evolution of 
tariffs would be uncertain, so you wouldn’t know whether there might be more of those in the 
offing.  A second one is that the time pattern of pass-through from the tariffs to our prices would 
be uncertain.  And then, finally—and this was pretty prominent in our thinking—it could be that 
these tariff hikes take place in an environment of pretty heavy, rapid aggregate demand growth 
and very little slack in the economy.  And in those situations, the shock might be more likely to 
pass through into inflation expectations than in an environment in which there was lots of slack.  
So the “look-through” scenario is definitely plausible.  It doesn’t fully take away the negative 
effects of the shock. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  I just have kind of a simple-minded question on the panel that has the 
house price-to-rent ratio and the long-run trend—and sort of evaluating our comfort on the basis 
of the ratio’s relation to the long-run trend.  Is that a friendly trend? 
MS. EDGE.  Yes. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
73 of 219


 
 
 
MR. QUARLES.  As I like to say, if my temperature rises by one degree a month starting 
in January, it will be below trend in December but only because I died in November.  [Laughter] 
MS. EDGE.  There is a lot of uncertainty regarding this trend.  There are possible reasons 
one could use to understand why there might be a trend here, though.  For example, it could be 
that quality improvements aren’t well captured in rents and prices, and there’s a difference 
between how the quality is being captured,  That could lead to differences emerging over time.  
It could be that prices increased more in areas in which there are more owner-occupied 
properties.  So there are possible reasons for the trend, and other sorts of considerations go into 
this line as well, actually.  There are things like costs of owning property as opposed to renting it.  
So there are reasons for the trend, but there is a lot of uncertainty associated with it.  We don’t 
want to put too much weight on this trend, but there are reasons for it being upward sloped. 
MR. QUARLES.  I guess if houses that you own are getting nicer and rental properties 
aren’t, and that’s accounting for the upward trend, then that would be, I guess, a reason for 
comparing the current situation with the trend and thinking that that’s the right comparison.  I 
could see that. 
MS. EDGE.  I still would be cautious about it.  The usual chart that we actually show has 
the bands around it, and they are sizable.  The lowest one is not completely flat, but it is flat. 
MR. LEHNERT.  We’d consider it a victory if you view trends with suspicion in the 
financial stability world, because they have an unfortunate history.  In this instance, in addition 
to everything that Rochelle said, there are a variety of different sources of information on rental 
properties versus owner-occupied properties, and one can try to correct for the differences 
between those properties. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
74 of 219


 
 
 
All of these different measures and all of these different kinds of perspectives on this 
question are telling the same story, which is that prices are now not really any longer within the 
kind of historical range that can be explained by rent.  They are somewhat above it.  They’re not 
a lot above it, but they are—it’s sort of where you might expect to see them, actually, at this 
point in this cycle. 
MR. WILCOX.  By fortuitous circumstance, we actually happen to have a bona fide 
measurement expert in the audience.  Shane Sherlund, do you want to elaborate at all on any of 
the measurement challenges that are associated with this?  And, for purposes of history, you 
should come up to the table, so you can be heard by the microphone. 
MR. SHERLUND.  I was actually afraid you might remember I was back here.  
[Laughter] 
MR. WILCOX.  My memory isn’t that bad. 
MR. SHERLUND.  It’s good.  We suspect that there is a trend in the price-to-rent ratio 
model for a lot of reasons.  As Rochelle alluded to, there are measurement differences between 
prices and rents of the houses you buy versus the houses and other types of properties that you 
would rent. 
One of the things that is driving prices higher right now is tightness in the housing 
market.  You might suspect that would be driving prices up and maybe not affecting rents as 
much. 
From a statistical point of view, we have this expectation that prices and rents move 
together.  If you just plug that into the data and you don’t impose any trends or anything at all, 
that relationship just breaks down.  That’s one of the primary reasons we have that trend in there 
as well. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
75 of 219


 
 
 
MR. WILCOX.  So why don’t you and I have a little dialogue for just a second.  The 
numerator comes from—are we using CoreLogic in the numerator? 
MR. SHERLUND.  Yes.  So that’s the repeat transactions. 
MR. WILCOX.  Right.  And the denominator comes from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
MR. SHERLUND.  Exactly. 
MR. WILCOX.  Institutionally, they come from different organizations.  There’s no 
reason why the methodology that goes into the numerator should be the same as the 
methodology that goes into constructing the denominator.  As you know, there’s a huge literature 
associated with measuring quality change for purposes of bias-adjusting the consumer price 
index.  Rents is one area in which they try mightily at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, but it’s not 
a simple challenge to try to measure a constant-quality residence over periods of time in a 
consistent manner, and exactly the same challenges arise.  This issue of getting the quality 
adjustment just right in both numerator and denominator could be one of the sources of the trend.  
I think the burden of the comments made by Rochelle and Andreas is, we don’t want to give you 
too much comfort in that regard. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Just a quick follow-up.  But have P/Es across asset classes gone up 
like this?  I mean, is this unique to prices to rents and housing?  Or if we look at other asset 
classes, would we not also see this P/E expansion over this time? 
MR. WILCOX.  My recollection, Shane, is that you’ve done quite a lot of work looking 
at this.  One reason why P/Es might have trended up is that discount rates might have come 
July 31–August 1, 2018
76 of 219


 
 
 
down.  My recollection is that there is, at best, a very limited role in your preferred model for 
interest rates.  But my recollection of the details of that is hazy. 
MR. SHERLUND.  That’s absolutely right.  Raven Molloy gave a presentation to the 
Board about a year ago, I think, that basically showed that the effect of mortgage rates and 
interest rates on house prices was pretty small.  If you think about what has happened to interest 
rates over the past 20 to 30 years, there has been quite a dip.  So even though it’s small per 
percentage point, you take 10 or 15 percentage points—now it’s something that might actually 
be relevant.  So that’s right. 
MR. WILCOX.  I don’t know broadly what the trend in P/Es is, but, again—  
MR. KAPLAN.  They moderated a little bit. 
MR. WILCOX.  I wouldn’t want to offer too much comfort that the trend increase in P/Es 
here in the price-to-rent ratio could be laid off as a consequence of low mortgage rates, because 
we don’t have a lot of strong empirical evidence to back that up. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  I’m sorry.  President Bullard, were you done?  You had your 
hand— 
MR. BULLARD.  I’m not commenting on this question, so if there’s more on this 
question— 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Is there more on this question? 
MR. BOSTIC.  Yes.  So, just in connection with Neel’s point, do we know what’s 
happening in cap rates across asset classes? 
MR. LEHNERT.  It’s hard.  Do you mean cap rates, like in property classes, or— 
MR. BOSTIC.  Yes, property classes. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
77 of 219


 
 
 
MR. LEHNERT.  Just in property markets?  Yes, we did this work Rochelle showed you, 
I think, right? 
MS. EDGE.  Yes.  What I was showing here was cap rates for CRE prices.  Sometimes 
we do show it relative to Treasury yields, but this one is just— 
MR. BOSTIC.  So I think that would suggest that this is a more general phenomenon than 
just in housing. 
MR. KASHKARI.  But their cap rate chart has a narrower time frame.  We’d have to 
look back over 30 years to see the same— 
MR. BOSTIC.  Oh, for the long historical one? 
MR. KASHKARI.  Yes—to see the trend line in the house price to rent. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Shane, do you want to say something about commercial real estate? 
MR. SHERLUND.  Sure.  I think the inclinations at the table are correct.  I think if we 
looked at a longer time series of cap rates, especially in CRE, they would follow what has 
happened with the 10-year Treasury yields fairly closely, plus or minus a spread.  I think if you 
went back to the early ’80s, you would see a very large downward trend in cap rates.  I think 
that’s absolutely right. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  More on this, or—we’re moving on now.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.   I do have just one suggestion on the house price issue, which is, you 
can look at house price to nominal GDP—and I think that’s not as popular a chart here—but you 
could view the price of the U.S. housing stock as being a price of capital, which is a substantial 
fraction of the U.S. capital stock.  According to balanced growth, that should be growing at the 
same rate as the nominal value of the capital stock itself or as nominal GDP itself, and, therefore, 
you should expect that to be a flat line.  It’s not a flat line when you draw it.  And then you could 
July 31–August 1, 2018
78 of 219


 
 
 
say something about whether those prices are getting out of bounds or not based on that, as 
opposed to having to compare with the rental market. 
One thing I’ve been concerned about on the rental comparison is that, when you think 
about single-family homes, it’s not really possible to rent out the homes the way it’s 
conceptualized in the calculation.  That market is extremely thin in many neighborhoods in the 
United States, possibly because of subsidies to housing and so on.  So there isn’t really a rental 
market in which people are indifferent between buying the house and renting the house, the way 
it’s conceptualized in the calculation.  But this is just my view on it. 
On the Smoot-Hawley tariff, I wanted to get back to this.  This says that it’s overrated 
because the deflation from 1929 to 1933, in effect, raised the tariffs.  Does it matter that that’s 
the reason the tariffs went up, or isn’t that a stealth increase in tariffs, so we would still look for 
major effects to come from that?  And also, what was happening to foreign price levels at this 
point?  Weren’t they also declining? 
MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think your point is well made that there was a large increase in 
effective tariff rates for whatever reason, so that’s something worth keeping in mind.  I just 
wanted to be able to put our current policy debate in perspective by looking at a particular policy 
action in the past, and the policy action in the past was the Smoot-Hawley.  Now, as you point 
out, certainly the tariff rates did go up a lot.  The fact that they were pushed up, those average 
tariff rates, by declining import prices reflects the general global level of deflation.  So, indeed, 
those declines in import prices were reflective of both collapses in global commodity prices and 
also the same deflation in our trading partners abroad that we were experiencing as well.  So 
those factors were indeed operative. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
79 of 219


 
 
 
Just to bring up one additional point on this:  One issue that has been raised is that even if 
the Smoot-Hawley tariff was not very consequential in its own right because the increase in tariff 
rates was small, it may have played a more pernicious role by sending the green light to other 
countries to raise their tariff barriers.  Now, there were lots of other reasons why those countries 
might have done it other than the U.S. example, but that was probably a factor, and that probably 
did help deepen the Depression, although, as I say, most scholars don’t think it was the major 
factor. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just to make sure I’m on the same page about my history here, I 
thought the volume of trade did go down substantially internationally. 
MR. KAMIN.  Yes, very much so. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes, and that has usually been traced back to Smoot-Hawley and its 
ramifications. 
MR. KAMIN.  Right.  In fact, those trading volumes were declining substantially before 
the Smoot-Hawley tariff as well as afterward. 
MR. BULLARD.  But we are talking about a 90 percent decline or something like that. 
MR. KAMIN.  I don’t recall the exact number, but— 
MR. BULLARD.  I thought it was quite large. 
MR. KAMIN.  Yes, it was extremely substantial.  And then if you look at some of the 
graphs in my main reference, it shows its downward trend in U.S. imports in volume terms, with 
a little jog downward—small, but you can see it—in imports right after the Smoot-Hawley.  So it 
definitely had a marginal contribution to the decline in imports. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So the research question is whether the Great Depression itself 
caused the collapse in trade or whether the collapse in trade contributed to the Great Depression. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
80 of 219


 
 
 
MR. KAMIN.  Right.  Chicken-and-egg-like. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  And then on the— 
MR. EVANS.  Sorry—I thought you were expecting an answer.  [Laughter] 
MR. BULLARD.  He said, “Chicken and egg.” 
MR. KAMIN.  I wasn’t sure about that. 
MR. BULLARD.  And then on the broad-based reciprocated tariffs, “reciprocated” 
means the entire rest of the world does exactly what the United States does and moves tariffs to, 
let’s say, the green dot here on page 2? 
MR. KAMIN.  Not exactly.  What the entire rest of the world does is, it raises tariffs on 
imports from the United States to the same extent that we increase tariffs on their imports.  So, 
what that means in practice is, if we impose a 15 percent tariff hike on imports from all 
countries, then every one of our trading partners imposes a 15 percent tariff hike only on imports 
from the United States, not on imports from their other trading partners.  So, as a result of that, 
the reduction in trade is larger for the United States in terms of two-way trade than it is for other 
countries, whose trade with the United States falls but not with everybody else that they trade 
with. 
MR. BULLARD.  What seems to be going on is that possibly the United States and 
China would have this kind of reciprocal trade war, but that it would not spread, necessarily, to 
all other trading partners because of bilateral deals.  And would that mitigate most of these 
effects, or would you still get a 4 percent decline in GDP? 
MR. KAMIN.  No, that would mitigate a lot of these effects.  We have been very hesitant 
to basically make predictions of how this will go, because doing so has proven near impossible.  
But, certainly, the signal that we took from last week’s agreement between the United States and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
81 of 219


 
 
 
the European Union—which certainly promises, at a minimum, to push any tariffs on autos 
toward the end of the year, maybe beyond the elections—is that it makes it much more likely that 
the trade tensions and actions will be concentrated in the United States–China bilateral 
relationship.  But that’s not a bet we want to put too much of our money on. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Other questions?  [No response]  If not, we now have an 
opportunity to comment on the financial stability issues, beginning with President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Two quick comments.  My first comment is 
on pending money market reform legislation, which the Chair was asked about during his 
testimony.  The proposal would repeal the requirement for prime funds to have floating NAVs 
rather than the stable NAV funds that apply to government-only money market funds.  A major 
source of instability during the crisis was the run on prime money market funds.  The fact that 
most money market funds are now holding only government securities has significantly reduced 
fund risk in short-term credit markets.  A return to a fixed NAV for prime funds would be a 
dangerous rollback and should be resisted.  Just as floating NAVs may have induced some 
money market funds to move primarily into Treasuries, fixed NAVs might motivate a return to 
investing in more risky assets.  While the legislation seems unlikely to be taken up by the Senate 
this session, we should be vocal about our opposition to restoring a practice that was a major 
source of instability during the crisis. 
My second comment concerns the risk discussion.  The worst outcome in the stress 
scenarios provided in the Tealbook shows us only returning to the Committee’s SEP estimate of 
the full-employment unemployment rate.  Although I realize that, in large macroeconomic 
models, it’s difficult to generate recessions, the economy itself is fully capable of doing so.  
July 31–August 1, 2018
82 of 219


 
 
 
[Laughter]  I am concerned that we expect banks to prepare for much more stressful scenarios 
than we model ourselves when considering monetary policy.  Perhaps we should fold some of 
the counterparty risk and financial acceleration that we use in our stress scenarios with regard to 
the banks into our monetary policy simulations.  I would find it useful to see more integrated 
simulations that more clearly connect adverse economic outcomes with the financial acceleration 
that likely would attend such stresses and that is implicit in our financial stability work and that 
also reflects the somewhat constrained monetary and fiscal policy responses that will be 
available to us in the near future.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I thank the staff for continuing to provide useful 
insights into sources of financial stability risk.  In the staff’s assessment, vulnerabilities of the 
U.S. financial system remain moderate.  However, we are at a point in the business cycle at 
which increased attention to financial stability risk is warranted.  Asset valuations in equity, 
corporate bond, and Treasury securities markets are elevated above historical norms.  Though 
they are below the levels seen before the housing crash, price-to-rent ratios in residential real 
estate markets are rising and near their peak from the ’80s and early ’90s. 
Commercial real estate valuations remain elevated, and issuance of commercial real 
estate loan obligations is rising.  Now, research indicates that it’s when high valuations are 
coupled with high debt levels and credit growth that financial stability is most at risk.  So far, 
nonfinancial business leverage remains at moderate levels overall, but it’s elevated in the 
speculative-grade and unrated firm segments, and banks are beginning to lower lending 
standards.  While it has improved since the financial crisis, our insight into the nonbank financial 
system remains more limited.  We should recognize this and continue to develop better ways to 
July 31–August 1, 2018
83 of 219


 
 
 
monitor this sector.  The staff’s stress analysis suggests that household balance sheets are 
currently sound, but while the household sector may not be the source of financial system shock, 
should a macroeconomic downturn take hold, the household sector is vulnerable, and default 
rates could rise significantly. 
How to incorporate financial stability risks into our monetary policymaking is still an 
open question.  Ideally, one would like to use macroprudential tools to address financial stability 
risks and monetary policy to address macroeconomic risks.  I continue to think that the 
macroprudential and microprudential tools are the first line of defense against financial 
imbalances.  However, whether monetary policy would need to be used as well would depend on 
the efficacy and/or willingness to use the prudential tools.  Our main countercyclical tools are the 
countercyclical capital buffer and the stress tests.  The lead times needed to use the 
countercyclical capital buffer make it less effective at addressing vulnerabilities that may rapidly 
develop or may be detected only after they have had time to develop.  This suggests the need to 
raise the buffer in good times before we see the vulnerabilities, yet the countercyclical capital 
buffer remains at zero in the United States.  The stress-test scenarios were tougher this year, but 
I’m not convinced that we’ve done enough to communicate the notion that, in future, we plan to 
use such stress tests as a countercyclical measure.   In my mind, it appears we’re backing off 
from that. 
With some constraints on our ability to use the countercyclical tools, I’m led to two 
conclusions.  First, it’s important to promote the structural resilience of the financial system 
across the business and financial cycles using our tools of capital and liquidity requirements, 
regular stress testing, resolution planning, and working with the industry to enhance strategies to 
improve cyber resiliency.  I support efforts that better align regulation and supervisory oversight 
July 31–August 1, 2018
84 of 219


 
 
 
with the location of the potential system risks—including proposals to make regulation less 
burdensome on community banks in the United States.  However, I think it would be a mistake 
to unwind the steps taken since the financial crisis that have led to a more resilient financial 
system.  I would like to see how the new settings perform throughout the cycle before making 
major changes.  The bills being discussed by the Congress to unwind the reforms made to money 
market funds are misguided.  We should do all we can to make the financial system more 
resilient.  In my mind, this means we should set standards for the structural resilience tools 
somewhat higher than they would be if we had more experience with, and confidence in, our 
countercyclical tools. 
My second conclusion is that even if, in theory, using macroprudential tools might be 
preferred, their limits suggest we may, in some cases, need to at least contemplate using 
monetary policy to address financial imbalances—we should be thinking now about how we 
might do that and in what situations.  To that end, later this year, the Conference of Presidents’ 
Committee on Financial Stability will be holding its second tabletop exercise to clarify our 
thinking further about our strategy for dealing with an economy facing increased financial 
stability risk.  Governor Brainard will be participating in this exercise.  I plan to update the 
Committee as appropriate about any lessons learned from the exercise.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I, too, appreciate the staff’s ongoing assessment 
of vulnerabilities in our financial system and the potential shocks that might trigger them.  
Because the assessment of financial-sector leverage depends significantly on judgments that the 
largest banks are sufficiently capitalized, my comments focus briefly on this component of the 
analysis. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
85 of 219


 
 
 
Without question, large bank capital levels and capital quality have improved over the 
past decade.  As this report highlights, the largest banks passed their stress test this year, and the 
four largest banking firms anticipate paying out essentially all of their income to shareholders.  
The largest banks are no longer building capital.  And although the report frames this outcome as 
a sign of resilience, which it may well be, it strikes me as a reason to be cautious.  High dividend 
payout rates, such as those approved under CCAR, run counter to financial stability aims, in my 
view, at a time when downside economic risks are notable, asset prices appear elevated, 
underwriting standards are easing, and certain sectors of the economy pose credit risk challenges. 
I understand that these stress tests can serve a valuable role in informing macro views of 
financial stability and even certain aspects of capital strength.  But I do worry that we rely too 
heavily on their use when it comes to communicating capital requirements, at the risk of 
mischaracterizing their role.  It would be preferable, in my view, to set clear and consistent 
regulatory capital expectations.  Ad hoc capital decisions by way of a stress test increase 
complexity and uncertainty, leading to greater risk of future mistakes and potentially weakening 
financial stability.  For this reason, considering the value of the countercyclical capital buffer or 
other capital enhancements might well be appropriate at a time when several risk indicators are 
flashing “moderate” to “elevated” and most forecasts project continuation of these current trends.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In light of the staff’s report on financial 
stability, I think there are three central and probably obvious questions.  What has changed since 
the previous assessment?  How vulnerable is the system?  And what does that imply for what we 
ought to do? 
July 31–August 1, 2018
86 of 219


 
 
 
So, what’s changed since the previous assessment?  The changes, in general, are modest.  
To my mind, there were two that deserve emphasis.  One we had a fair bit of discussion about, 
which is that growth in the prices of houses has continued and might even have picked up since 
the previous time.  And prices are now somewhat above their long-run relationship to rents and 
other fundamentals.  That is a phenomenon that will always bear watching.  But I, at the end of 
the day, do not yet think it’s worrying, for all of the reasons that were outlined in the long 
discussion about the relationship to trend.  And also, the stress tests consider resilience to very 
large house price declines, and they indicate that banks would not likely amplify a reversal in 
house prices currently in a destabilizing way.  In addition, mortgage debt is advancing at a 
moderate pace and primarily among borrowers that have strong credit histories.  You know, I 
think the special topic memo on household vulnerabilities painted a compelling picture of strong 
mortgage underwriting currently.  And, finally, I don’t find it surprising that house prices will be 
either somewhat above or somewhat below trend as part of normal fluctuations in housing 
markets, and right now, the current deviation from fundamentals doesn’t appear to be outsized, at 
least on a national basis. 
The second element in the staff’s analysis that certainly drew my attention relates to 
conditions in leveraged lending markets.  We continue to see signs of weakening in lending 
standards in those markets.  I think the phrase is “market participants are saying that 7 is the new 
6.”  And we see strong demand for leveraged loans and a pickup in supply related to increasing 
M&A activity.  Right now, supervisory staff are currently performing the review of shared 
national credits, and that’s likely to confirm these anecdotes from market participants. 
The second question is, where do those changes—on top of the evolution over the past 
several years—leave us with respect to financial stability vulnerabilities?  I, at least, tend to 
July 31–August 1, 2018
87 of 219


 
 
 
agree broadly with the staff assessment.  Asset valuations are elevated across a broad range of 
assets, but no major asset class is caught in a wild speculative bubble like in the late 1990s or the 
mid-2000s.  Overall, nonfinancial borrowing appears moderate.  Corporate borrowing, especially 
by speculative-grade firms, has been growing more rapidly for years, but household borrowing is 
advancing in line with GDP.  And offset against that, financial-sector leverage is very low by the 
standards of the past several decades.  In the banking sector, that relates to the regulatory 
standards that have been put in place and the stress tests.  But leverage is also relatively low 
elsewhere in the financial system.  Maturity transformation is also low.  Banks are substantially 
less reliant on short-term wholesale funding, and, at least for the time being, the run risk 
associated with prime money market funds has been nearly eliminated. 
So how does all of that get put together?  It’s not as much of a science as we would hope 
it would be to combine that set of vulnerabilities into an overall assessment.  And, as Rochelle 
indicated in her briefing, the staff has judged that overall vulnerabilities have been moderate for 
four years, despite a steadily increasing move to evaluate evaluation pressures and elevated 
corporate borrowing.  But despite those caveats, I do agree that, at least for now, vulnerabilities 
are moderate overall, all things considered.  The corporate credit cycle will turn down at some 
point, but the financial sector appears ready to absorb, rather than unusually amplify, that shock. 
So, the third question is, what does that assessment imply for the appropriate policy 
response?  The baseline for the Board’s countercyclical capital buffer framework is that 
moderate overall vulnerabilities do not call for additional countercyclical policy actions to 
promote financial stability.  Instead, current vulnerabilities at a moderate overall level suggest 
that it’s important to maintain the resilience of the financial sector.  Stress tests support that goal.  
Again, as Rochelle’s presentation indicated, this year’s scenarios, which were the most severe we 
July 31–August 1, 2018
88 of 219


 
 
 
have ever done, mean that the large banks will maintain high capital levels over the coming year, 
and some of the largest will, in fact, increase their capital levels.  And we need to ensure that our 
supervisory expectations for corporate lending are met. 
So, as I mentioned, the SNC review is under way, and we will be considering that review 
in the near future.  That said, we shouldn’t be complacent.  Our greatest risk is complacency.  
And it’s important to continue to probe whether vulnerabilities are rising and how we should 
address those vulnerabilities.  But we shouldn’t also overstate the likely efficacy of 
countercyclical tools.  They are what they are, but my understanding of the various analyses that 
have been done of the likely effects of the countercyclical capital buffer by our staff, by joint 
work internationally, and by independent academics is that the CCyB is unlikely to have material 
effects on the growth of credit or asset prices.  Instead, the primary effect of the CCyB is 
enhanced resilience at large banks and across the financial system when we assess that financial 
stability risks are high.  And right now, our assessment is that they are moderate. 
So in light of these analyses, it’s not clear that the CCyB would help limit elevated asset 
prices or corporate borrowing or provide much support to lending during a downturn.   The 
CCyB has an important role.  But that role is enhancing resilience—not taming the business 
cycle. 
Finally, notwithstanding the fact that I spent a little bit of time talking about why I do 
think it’s sensible at this moment not to have turned on the CCyB, I do want to be clear that 
that’s a new tool, and I at least have an open mind, both to new analyses and to the implications 
of incoming data as to the appropriate setting of the CCyB.  And I look forward to continued 
discussions about how our decisions regarding the stance and tools of monetary policy can be 
complemented by Board actions to promote financial stability. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
89 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you. The quarterly surveillance highlights two broad areas that 
merit heightened vigilance.  First, asset valuations and risk appetite now exceed the 90th 
percentile of the historical distribution.  Notably, spreads on leveraged loans and the securitized 
products backed by those loans are very low, and the SLOOS suggests that underwriting 
standards for leveraged loans may be declining to levels that we haven’t seen since 2005, with an 
increasing share having debt multiples above 6.  Similarly, issuance of CLOs backed by 
commercial real estate loans has been doubling every year for the past few years, driven by 
strong investor demand, a trend that staff analysis suggests bears careful monitoring.  In my 
discussions with market participants, there has been increased focus on the over $2 trillion in 
corporate bonds that are close to the edge of investment grade, which could be vulnerable to 
downgrades in the face of a negative shock.  Analysis by our colleagues in New York suggests 
that forced sales of such downgraded speculative-grade bonds by institutional investors and 
outflows at open-end mutual funds could lead to liquidity dislocations. 
Second, elevated valuations and risk appetite in business credit markets are mirrored on 
the demand side by an increase in business leverage to historically elevated levels.  In the 
nonfinancial business sector, the debt-to-income ratio has increased to near the upper end of its 
historical distribution, and gross leverage at speculative-grade and nonrated firms is near its 
historical peak. 
As we have seen in previous cycles, unexpected negative shocks to earnings, in 
combination with increased interest rates, could lead to rising levels of delinquencies among 
these borrowers and related stresses to some banks’ balance sheets. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
90 of 219


 
 
 
Against this backdrop of elevated risk-taking and historically high business indebtedness, 
it’s reassuring that our supervised banking institutions remain well capitalized because of 
requirements that we and other regulators have put in place  If asset valuations return to more 
normal levels, or corporate defaults rise, these strong capital buffers will be vital in ensuring that 
banks can absorb the fallout and continue to provide credit.  But, as can be seen in the quarterly 
surveillance report, overall regulatory capital has flatlined in the past two years when measured 
against either risk-weighted assets or total assets.  Indeed, for our largest globally systemic 
banking institutions, the ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets has actually declined 
since 2016. 
I would like to echoing comments voiced by Presidents Mester and George.  :Looking 
ahead over the medium term, in order to maintain the same degree of resilience, some banks may 
well need capital buffers that are somewhat thicker than they are now.  Recent history suggests 
the business cycle and the financial cycle are increasingly intertwined.  The previous two 
expansions ended because of financial imbalances, and financial excesses also played a role in 
the early 1990s downturn.  Thus, if recent history is any guide, it’s a good bet that as the 
expansion continues, financial imbalances will extend still further. 
The results of this year’s CCAR illustrate some inherent limitations of such stress tests in 
serving as our primary countercyclical tool.  In recent years, a design principle has been to make 
those stress tests tougher as the financial and business cycles mature in an effort to use them as 
both structural and countercyclical tools.  By design, as you saw in the picture, the 
unemployment rate reaches 10 percent in a severely adverse scenario when the economy is 
strong.  And with the starting point for the unemployment rate moving lower and lower, a 
progressively larger shock is needed to achieve that level.  This year, overall, the stress tests 
July 31–August 1, 2018
91 of 219


 
 
 
were the toughest yet.  Despite that, however, the largest firms have announced plans to make 
payouts that are in excess of projected earnings overall.  With assets likely to be growing in this 
expanding economy, this implies that capital buffers relative to risk-weighted assets are likely to 
edge down further for those largest banks. 
Because it’s important that banks build resilience as cyclical risks mount, it may become 
appropriate for the Board to activate the countercyclical buffer for the first time.  The purpose of 
that buffer is precisely to ensure that large banking organizations retain capital as cyclical 
pressures build, in order to sustain resilience when there’s an elevated risk of above-normal 
losses, which often follows periods such as those we see today.  This should help counterbalance 
the competitive pressures they otherwise face to pay out all of their earnings.  The buffer is 
intended to be released as the economy weakens—and, in fact, we saw that in the United 
Kingdom recently.  Unlike the stress test, with the CCyB, banks have ample time to incorporate 
the buffer into their capital plans.  There’s no element of surprise specific to any particular bank, 
and the buffer can be increased very slowly over time in increments as small as 25 basis points 
per year, as we saw in France. 
Tomorrow, we’ll turn to monetary policy.  As we have discussed in the past, the first line 
of defense in promoting financial stability should be targeted tools, such as the countercyclical 
capital buffer.  In the absence of deploying the countercyclical buffer, monetary policy may well 
need to carry a greater burden in leaning against those financial excesses, and that would be 
unfortunate because adding financial stability concerns to the burden monetary policy must carry 
could well undermine the sustained achievement of our employment and inflation goals.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
92 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  If there are no further comments—I don’t believe 
there are—on financial stability, we now turn to our go-round on the economy, beginning with 
President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Reports received from Sixth District directors 
and contacts suggest that demand remained robust for the second quarter.  Most contacts 
continue to expect a solid pace of activity over the next year or so, even if not at the level seen in 
the second quarter.  But expectations regarding future demand were mixed.  Attitudes remain 
guarded, primarily due to continuing uncertainty about trade policy.  Although second-quarter 
real GDP growth came in higher than I had previously anticipated, the presence of a few special 
factors underlay that result, and I’m hesitant to conclude that last quarter’s strength was a clear 
signal that the economy has shifted into a higher gear.  Outside the oil and gas mining sector, 
business fixed investment posted a moderate gain, falling short of its solid but unspectacular 
four-quarter growth rate. 
The strong point on consumer spending might be a sign of greater stimulus from tax cuts 
than I’m expecting, but at least some of the strength is plausibly due to some payback after the 
miserly growth in the first quarter. 
And then there are soybeans.  [Laughter]  As others have noted, they provided a 
temporary boost to second-quarter growth.  But, just as an aside, my staff pointed out to me that 
over the past six years, soybean exports have had roughly the same effect on quarter-to-quarter 
fluctuations and output growth as residential investment.  And that is a sentence I never thought I 
would utter.  [Laughter] 
Our regional intelligence-gathering efforts uncovered some hint of the trade policy front-
running that apparently drove some of the surge in exports.  Several contacts indicated that they 
July 31–August 1, 2018
93 of 219


 
 
 
were stockpiling both materials and finished goods as a hedge against tariffs.  Because there was 
no evidence of building inventories in the second-quarter data, I’m largely discounting these 
stories as special cases, but it may be something to keep our eyes on.  Overall, I’m not inclined to 
change my forecast of real GDP growth this year, which is in the high 2 percent neighborhood, 
and I’m holding to my previous view that the risks around my growth prediction are balanced. 
That said, it wouldn’t take much for me to shift my risk assessment to the downside.  
Apprehension concerning trade policy has clearly intensified.  Most of our contacts suggested 
that they are not materially altering their business plans with respect to capital expenditure just 
yet, which is a view that was largely echoed in the results of our most recent Survey of Business 
Uncertainty.  Only about one-fifth of survey respondents indicated that they were reassessing 
their 2018 and 2019 capital expenditure plans as a result of trade concerns.  Of that group, 6 out 
of 10 indicated that plan expenditures were under review as opposed to dropped, or postponed, 
or accelerated, or newly added. 
In previous meetings, I have expressed concern that trade developments may already be 
exerting direct negative effects on business investment.  Our survey results, combined with 
anecdotal reports from my region, suggest that material negative effects are not yet widespread, 
at least with respect to business investment.  But, like everyone else, I’m concerned that the 
situation could turn quickly, and that concern has been manifest for the past two meetings.  What 
I have not been particularly worried about before today are potential price pressures associated 
with trade policy.  But things, as they say, have changed.  In contrast to what we heard over 
previous cycles, many contacts are now reporting the ability, or the expectation of the ability, to 
pass along input cost increases to their customers.  A significant fraction of these reports are 
related to tariffs in industries that use steel and aluminum as inputs.  But I get the sense that 
July 31–August 1, 2018
94 of 219


 
 
 
businesses are more broadly feeling that they can pass along price increases to offset some of the 
increase in expenses associated with freight, fuel, and so on. 
The lion’s share of cost pass-through is still concentrated in the intermediate stages of 
production or to wholesalers.  However, I perceive a growing belief among my contacts that cost 
increases are going to find a way into the consumer’s market basket and will be a moderating 
influence on demand when they do so.  Thus, it is my view that the question President Harker 
asked earlier about how much, if any, observed changes in inflation we should look through is a 
question that all of us around this table will need to wrestle with and find peace with, whatever 
answer we come up with in the coming months.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My economic outlook is little changed from 
the June meeting.  Despite occasional concerns expressed by businesspeople about the effect of 
potential tariffs, the primary concern they discuss is the difficulty of finding additional workers.  
Most employers seem to be dealing with tight labor markets by using hiring bonuses, stock 
options, more job training, and other measures that do not disrupt the overall salary structure.  
However, more firms are explicitly discussing whether they can continue to hold the line on 
wages and how their business models may need to adjust to an extended period of labor 
shortages.  In my region, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine now all have unemployment 
rates below 3 percent.  And complaints about labor shortages in these states are particularly acute 
for unskilled labor, in part because of the difficulties in getting temporary visas. 
Given that we already have tight labor markets—and with the likelihood that labor 
markets will tighten much more over the course of this year—my staff is looking at the 
association between tight labor markets and job-to-job switches.  Because workers in a tight 
July 31–August 1, 2018
95 of 219


 
 
 
labor market may be able to get higher wages by switching employers without a spell of 
unemployment, it is possible that job-to-job switches may provide a better indication of labor 
market tightness than focusing only on unemployment rates.  When my staff compared the 
signals provided by the unemployment rates relative to job-to-job switch rates at the state level, it 
quickly became apparent that the two series are very highly correlated.  However, the job-to-job 
switch rate does tend to rise more than proportionately as the unemployment rate gets quite 
low—say, to 4 percent or lower.  My staff then looked at state-level wage equations and found 
that if one allows for a nonlinear response to the unemployment rate at very low rates, the job-to-
job switch rate provides little additional information above and beyond the unemployment rate. 
To be sure, higher labor demand in states with tight labor markets, proxied by the 
unemployment rate, generates higher wages at the state level and possibly even more so as 
unemployment dips especially low.  If we start to see more wage and price pressures as labor 
markets tighten over the course of this year, an important question will be how much we should 
tighten monetary policy in response.  It is notable that the Tealbook projection needs monetary 
policy to tighten vigorously by 2020, with the federal funds rate reaching 4¾ percent, just to 
stabilize the unemployment rate at 3.4 percent and ultimately move us in the direction of full 
employment.  In contrast, the median SEP has the unemployment rate stabilizing at a slightly 
higher unemployment rate of 3.5 percent with much less tightening.  The median federal funds 
rate in the most recent SEP is 3.4 percent, just 50 basis points higher than the median estimate of 
the long-run federal funds rate. 
One possibility for the difference between the median SEP and the Tealbook may be that 
FOMC participants believe that the economy is much more interest sensitive—a possibility that 
is explored in one of the simulations in the Tealbook.  However, even in this simulation, the 
July 31–August 1, 2018
96 of 219


 
 
 
federal funds rate needs to rise more than the median SEP projection.  As currently constructed, 
the median SEP has the unemployment rate falling below the SEP range for the long-run 
unemployment rate, leading to a modest target overshoot by both core and total PCE inflation 
rates.  The SEP-implied policy rate path, coupled with the recent tendency to overestimate the 
path of the unemployment rate, may require running the economy above capacity for a very long 
time before then returning to full employment. 
Our current framework does not explicitly state the average period over which monetary 
policy should attain its goals.  The current strategy, however, seems to be stretching this horizon 
very far into the future.  We do not have much to refer to in terms of historical episodes of the 
economy running above full employment for a prolonged period of time.  Still, the assumption 
that inflation will continue to follow the same linear relationship vis-à-vis the unemployment 
rate, and that other imbalances will not emerge, may not be the most prudent.  Of course, if the 
Committee were to change its strategy to allow for more flexibility on the inflation goal either 
temporarily or indefinitely, the SEP policy rate path might be just what we would need to obtain 
the higher inflation rate.  Absent such a change in the framework, however, the risk is that we 
will simply overstimulate the economy.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I began talking about the possibility of 
yield curve inversion on December 1, 2017, in a speech.  Since that time, the curve has flattened 
further, and it continued to flatten during the intermeeting period.  There’s also been a healthy 
debate on this issue both inside and outside the Committee during this period, and I think it has 
been very beneficial that this debate has proceeded well ahead of any actual inversion event.  I 
agree with many of you and many in financial markets that the U.S. economy faces no 
July 31–August 1, 2018
97 of 219


 
 
 
difficulties on this dimension as of today.  The various measures of yield curve slopes remain 
positive.  Recession probability 6 to 12 months ahead remains low.  I’m thoroughly aware that 
people like to measure the yield curve slope in different ways, but my view on this is that these 
different measures are highly correlated, and if we get a meaningful inversion event, all or most 
of these will invert. 
Despite the fact that we’re in good shape today, we do face a conundrum, as we did in the 
mid-2000s.  Longer-term yields are not rising in tandem with the policy rate increases of this 
Committee.  A 50 basis point increase in the policy rate in the second half of 2018 may well 
bring this matter to a head.  Because of the way the Summary of Economic Projections works, a 
September decision to raise the policy rate is likely to be more of a 50 basis point decision, not a 
25 basis point decision.  This is because the SEP will also indicate how many rate increases we 
expect for the remainder of the year, and, to the extent that the Committee will see one more 
increase for the rest of the year, that will be cemented in the expectations of financial markets.  
So I think September is probably a bigger decision than it may appear. 
Of course, longer-term yields could begin to rise at any moment more sharply, and in that 
case, the Committee strategy will work well.  My purpose here is to try to plan for the alternative 
case, in which the longer end of the yield curve does not cooperate.  Should an inversion 
threaten, I think this Committee should have a plan to pause rate increases until we get more 
clarity on the direction of longer-term yields. 
What is the interpretation of relatively low longer-term nominal Treasury yields and, 
hence, the flat yield curve?  One interpretation is that there’s a mismatch between the thinking of 
global financial markets, the long end of the curve, and the thinking here at the Fed, the short end 
of the curve.  Markets see slower U.S. real GDP growth ahead, plus very little inflation pressure, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
98 of 219


 
 
 
plus a low global rates environment and, therefore, predict low rates ahead.  The traditional Fed 
analysis is in terms of gap-based models even while acknowledging that the empirical evidence 
behind this view has weakened considerably over the past two decades.  The empirical evidence 
on Phillips curve effects has weakened for a good reason.  As I have discussed here before, the 
rise of the inflation-targeting era since approximately 1995 has made inflation low and stable, 
and, hence, movements in inflation have become difficult to relate to any real variables in an 
empirical analysis. 
Is the market view reasonable?  I think it is.  First, slower real growth ahead is widely 
predicted, including by this Committee.  We’re looking at something close to 3 percent real GDP 
growth year over year today.  Most are projecting slower growth in 2019 and still-slower growth 
in 2020.  Why is this the standard prediction in the forecasting community?  It’s because of slow 
productivity growth, which is not expected to pick up meaningfully, and limited scope for labor 
force growth.  In essence, the market is unwilling to bet on improvements in productivity growth.  
Instead, they are betting that we are in a low-productivity regime. 
Second, the market sees very little inflation pressure.  TIPS-based inflation expectations 
remain subdued.  These expectations, as I discussed last time, are interesting because they 
contain all available information, including recent fiscal policy changes, changes in the supply of 
U.S. Treasury securities and other developments in credit markets, and other factors—including 
the future policy of this Committee.  Markets tend to think that the Committee will be more 
dovish than the Committee itself thinks.  So, putting all of that together, it’s impressive that 
inflation expectations are as low as they are, according to market-based measures. 
Finally, the market sees a low global rate environment.  As far as foreign policymakers 
are concerned, the Bank of Japan and the ECB look unlikely to make any meaningful rate 
July 31–August 1, 2018
99 of 219


 
 
 
move—certainly in the next year and possibly beyond that.  In the low global rate environment, 
higher U.S. yields find many buyers, and this is helping to keep longer-term nominal yields low 
in the United States. 
One message from the ongoing yield curve debate seems to be that the Committee’s 
narrative is somewhat miscalibrated.  This suggests to me that the Committee’s policy thinking 
could benefit from moving closer to one of the following:  One possibility would be the price-
level targeting example in the Tealbook, in which we would make up for past misses on the 
inflation target on the low side by allowing inflation a little bit on the high side.  There’s been a 
lot of talk about symmetry of the inflation target around the table.  We could lean more in that 
direction.  I think that would help. 
Another possibility would be to look at a Taylor rule variant that implies reduced 
emphasis, or even zero emphasis, on the output or unemployment gap, as illustrated in the 
Cleveland Fed monetary policy rules webpage.  This orientation would acknowledge that the 
empirical evidence on the Phillips curve has faded in recent decades and would be a way to make 
an adjustment in that direction. 
A final way we could go would be the asymmetric loss function example in the Tealbook, 
in which the Committee does not try to raise unemployment to its own perception of a natural 
rate of unemployment but merely allows labor market outcomes to be what they will be, so long 
as inflation outcomes remain close to target.  All of these possibilities would provide a basis for a 
more subdued planned policy rate increases than what is currently contained in the Committee’s 
SEP median. 
I have a couple of other comments that I wanted to make here.  First of all, there’s the 
Tealbook and briefing evidence on international yield curve inversions.  The international 
July 31–August 1, 2018
100 of 219


 
 
 
evidence is that yield curve inversions do not predict recessions as well—the cross-country 
evidence is weaker on this dimension than it is in the United States.  In earlier incarnations in my 
career, I took this evidence very seriously and dismissed the yield curve signal in the United 
States.  I was burned by that in 2000 and again in 2006, when the yield curve did a good job of 
predicting trouble ahead for the U.S. economy.  I think the problem is that the United States is 
not equal to other countries, which tend to be much more open economies than ours.  So in a 
foreign economy, the policymaker may be doing something that’s responding to local conditions, 
but the longer end of the yield curve may be moving for reasons that are unrelated to domestic 
macroeconomic prospects. 
Also, in the international correlations, you’re looking at the same thing over and over 
again for several countries in Europe—Germany, France, Italy, and, to some extent, the United 
Kingdom.  Other countries around the world are much smaller, and some of them have much 
different situations—Latin America and parts of Asia.  So I’m not sure that we can take the 
international evidence quite as seriously as maybe I would have taken it in the past and so am 
dismissing this to some degree.  I think that in the United States, you have a relatively closed 
economy in which the yield curve, therefore, sends a better signal about the future U.S. 
prospects. 
I want to turn to key risks in the outlook.  The alternative simulations in the Tealbook 
seem to suggest that the major trade war is the key risk, and we just talked about this a few 
minutes ago.  I understand that there are many caveats around that analysis, but based on my 
contacts in the Eighth District who are expressing considerable angst on this issue, I think it 
probably is the key risk that’s facing the Committee in the near term.  I think we should take that 
seriously and calibrate monetary policy appropriately. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
101 of 219


 
 
 
The other alternative simulations meant to simulate other possible risks to the U.S. 
economy seem to suggest to me that inflation is unlikely to deviate very meaningfully from the 
2 percent target even if some of these major risks materialize.  So if you take the alternative 
simulations together, I interpret them to mean that we can confront inflation risks relatively 
easily, at least according to this analysis.  Either the trade war would develop and we’d go into 
recession or one of the other risks would develop.  But, in those scenarios, we would be able to 
contain inflation, according to the analysis in the Tealbook.  So I just don’t see a lot of inflation 
risk that we have to get in front of at this juncture.  To President Bostic’s question about whether 
we should look through the increase in prices associated with a trade war, it would certainly 
seem that we should.  A 4 percent drop in GDP—to the extent that’s the number that you think is 
a reasonable one—would be very serious indeed for the U.S. economy, and the increase in prices 
associated with that would be temporary. 
As a final thought, let me return to price-level targeting and just put a thought in your 
head.  From 1995 to 2012, as I mentioned earlier, U.S. monetary policy did look like de facto 
price-level targeting directed towarda 2 percent rate of price-level increase.  We did stay right 
around that trend line all during that 17-year period.  Since 2012, we have fallen off that price-
level path, and we’re now about 4½ percent below that path.  To get back to that price-level path, 
which could be argued to be optimal monetary policy, we would have to be at 2½ percent 
inflation for a decade.  So I put that out there as a rule of thumb about what we should be 
thinking about in terms of optimal future monetary policy for the Committee.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
102 of 219


 
 
 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  Underlying momentum in domestic demand is strong by 
any measure.  The BEA estimates that real GDP rose at a robust 4 percent annual rate last 
quarter, and incoming data on the labor market have likewise been strong.  Because of the boost 
to spending that fiscal policy will provide over the next year or so, momentum should remain 
robust. 
Cutting through all of the puts and takes in the second-quarter real GDP release, private 
domestic final purchases, a good indicator of underlying demand, increased 4 percent.  Beyond 
that, there were offsetting contributions from net exports and inventories.  Net exports 
contributed more than 1 percentage point to annualized GDP growth, in part because many firms 
sought to export goods before tariffs might go into effect.  And, of course, with soybeans making 
an outsized contribution, that’s unlikely to be repeated.  On the flipside, the BEA estimates that 
there was a drawdown in inventories that led to a roughly offsetting negative contribution.  These 
forces are likely to exert offsetting pressures in the opposite direction from now on. 
In the future, it’s likely that above-trend growth will continue here at home.  Business 
confidence and consumer confidence remain high, and we’ve yet to see the full effects of the 
recent tax cuts and spending increases.  The staff’s estimates suggest that fiscal impetus will 
contribute about ½ percentage point to real GDP growth this year and next. 
Looking at global real growth, we are seeing somewhat greater divergence.  After posting 
solid gains last year and early this year, foreign economies appear, overall, to be settling into 
something closer to trend growth.  Real GDP growth in the advanced foreign economies appears 
to have slowed earlier this year.  More recent indicators have been more encouraging.  But 
growth has slowed among emerging economies.  The trend is particularly important in China, 
whose slowing growth reflects the Chinese government’s earlier campaign to address financial 
July 31–August 1, 2018
103 of 219


 
 
 
imbalances as well as more recent trade tensions.  The authorities there seem well positioned to 
provide offsetting support, however. 
With foreign economic activity overall decelerating this year, the theme of divergence 
between the U.S. and foreign outlooks has gained prominence, with expectations that monetary 
policy will increasingly diverge following the emergence of strong divergent paths in fiscal 
policy.  Consistent with that theme, the dollar has appreciated by about 1 percent since our June 
meeting and 4 percent so far this year.  Most recently, U.S. trade policy appears to be a 
contributing force.  Notably, we saw a 6 percent appreciation of the dollar against the Chinese 
renminbi in the intermeeting period, which coincided with news about possible new tariffs on 
Chinese imports as well as pronouncements by Chinese monetary authorities of easing measures. 
But broader comprehensive indexes suggest overall financial conditions remain quite 
supportive of real GDP growth and are little changed on net.  As of Friday, the 10-year Treasury 
yield was unchanged from the June meeting.  Private-sector yields are also little changed.  Equity 
prices are up about ¾ percent since June.  But as I just noted, the stronger dollar provides 
somewhat of an offset to that. 
Regarding our policy goals, the economy’s underlying strength is confirmed in evidence 
of a very strong labor market.  So far this year, payroll gains have averaged over 200,000 per 
month, which is a step-up from last year and well above the levels required to keep the 
unemployment rate moving down.  By a variety of metrics, the labor market appears to be tight.  
The ratio of job openings to measures of available workers is the highest we have seen since 
2000.  The quits rate is similarly close to levels last seen in 2001 and above those seen in 2007, 
and supplier deliveries are also showing delays at levels not seen since the pre-crisis period, 
anecdotally reflecting driver shortages. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
104 of 219


 
 
 
In contrast, although the unemployment rate is currently below most estimates of its long-
run level, the prime-age employment-to-population ratio still remains about 1 percentage point 
below its pre-crisis peak.  In my view, that shortfall could present some upside risk. 
Wages also suggest a mixed picture.  With productivity gains over the past couple of 
years now moving back toward pre-crisis levels, I will be looking for nominal wage gains also to 
move back up to pre-crisis levels, a period when core inflation was just slightly above 2 percent.  
For the ECI, it looks like we may be within striking distance.  This morning’s data, with the ECI 
increasing 2.9 percent over the most recent four quarters—that is about ¼ percentage point shy 
of the pace in 2005 to 2007—suggest that resource utilization is indeed getting tighter. 
Regarding the second leg of our dual mandate, overall inflation measures are also 
encouraging.  First, this morning’s report suggested core prices were up 1.9 percent, up a few 
tenths from a year-earlier period.  The latest data on inflation are encouraging, and I’ll want to 
see further evidence that the underlying trend is also moving up.  Thus, although core PCE 
inflation over the past year is very close to our target, in its May reading, the Dallas Fed’s 
trimmed mean rate was still somewhat below the target at 1.8 percent and very little changed 
from a year earlier.  I would feel more confident if we saw this measure, too, coming in 
sustainably at or above 2 percent. 
Second, while survey measures of longer-run underlying inflation expectations have 
moved up over the past year, on net, they still seem to be indicating longer-run expectations 
remain somewhat below our 2 percent objective, and the story for inflation compensation is 
similar.  It’s moving in a positive direction but not yet recovering to the levels that we saw in 
2013 and 2014.  And that same story is evident in the results of exercises using statistical filters.  
The models of the permanent component of inflation that the Board’s staff follow are currently 
July 31–August 1, 2018
105 of 219


 
 
 
clustered around 1¾ percent, not yet evidencing any upward movement.  In order to ensure that 
inflation expectations are firmly re-anchored at 2 percent for all of the reasons we discussed this 
morning, I am comfortable with having a monetary policy that tolerates a modest overshoot 
along the lines of the median path we saw in the most recent SEP. 
Our goal should be to sustain full employment and re-anchor inflation expectations.  We 
should aim to sustain the current “Goldilocks” trajectory.  But it would be unwise to 
underestimate the risks associated with this course.  With the incoming data suggesting an 
economy close to full employment and target inflation and with additional fiscal stimulus in the 
pipeline, avoiding the imbalances associated with overheating is likely to require continued 
increases in the federal funds rate.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  I’m going to suggest that we take an extralong 
coffee break now.  You’ve been good.  [Laughter]  So why don’t we come back at three o’clock 
by that clock.  Thanks. 
[Coffee break] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  The economic go-round continues with President 
Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  All right.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eleventh District economy 
continues to be very strong.  In Texas, job growth was estimated to be 3½ percent in the second 
quarter of 2018 and 3.6 percent job growth for the first half of the year.  This is an unprecedented 
rate of job growth for the State of Texas.  Employment gains are broad based geographically and 
across industries, but the energy sector is still adding jobs at a faster rate than any other sector in 
the state.  We do believe that Texas job growth will cool off in the second half of 2018 because 
of a historically tight labor market, and we do think trade tensions will have some effect on 
July 31–August 1, 2018
106 of 219


 
 
 
export growth.  We think the increase in the value of the trade-weighted dollar, which was talked 
about earlier, is going to have some effect on export growth.  And we actually got some 
benefit—which we haven’t talked about in the past few months—in the first half of the year from 
the boost resulting from Hurricane Harvey spending, and that benefit will fade. 
Our contacts report that a tightening labor market is resulting in mounting wage 
pressures, particularly, though, for small and midsize firms.  For bigger firms—and that means 
over 1,000 employees—it’s interesting:  Our surveys and the follow-up discussions suggest that 
wage growth, particularly away from very skilled positions, is more muted.  We speculate—and 
they speculate—it could be due to greater opportunities for upward mobility in a larger firm, 
greater job benefits in a larger firm, and the fact that larger firms simply have more levers with 
which to address competitive pressure pertaining to workers.  But we will continue to watch that 
carefully. 
Certainly, various contacts across a wide range of industries in our District are expressing 
concerns regarding trade tensions, not surprisingly—particularly U.S–China trade frictions but 
also uncertainty regarding NAFTA.  Texas is an extremely large exporting state, and Mexico and 
Canada make up 45 percent of our exports.  Having said all of that, our businesspeople are 
hopeful these issues will be resolved.  Some of the soundings from Mexico are more moderate 
than they were—as was mentioned earlier—and I think people are more optimistic that some of 
these trade disputes, at least with Mexico and Canada, will get resolved.  So they are taking a 
wait-and-see approach on cap-ex. 
Regarding energy, the most notable thing that’s happened since the previous meeting is 
outages from Venezuela—and, we’d say, increasing supply uncertainty due to U.S. threatened 
sanctions on Iran.  This has contributed to substantial price volatility.  The upward price 
July 31–August 1, 2018
107 of 219


 
 
 
pressure, though, has been partially alleviated by statements from OPEC members, particularly 
Saudi Arabia and Russia, that they plan to increase production.  Just to put all of this in context, 
U.S. production certainly is growing very rapidly, and we see this in the cap-ex numbers.  Our 
estimates indicate that U.S. production already reached 11 million barrels a day in early July.  
That’s crude oil production.  The United States now roughly matches the production of all of 
Saudi Arabia.  And in comparison, Russia produces about 11½ million barrels of crude oil per 
day on average. 
The reason I mention these numbers is, behind those big three, you get Iran and Iraq.  
Iran hasn’t been discussed as much, produces about 3.8 million barrels a day, and exports about 
2½ million barrels a day.  And you could see why, even though Saudi Arabia increased their 
production, there are limits to their ability to offset what might be lost from Iran.  It’s our own 
estimate that the increase from Saudi Arabia and Russia just offsets the loss of production from 
Venezuela and a modest expectation for loss of exports from Iran.  I’ll come back to that.  About 
70 percent of the growth in the United States since 2017 has come from the Permian Basin, but 
we’d emphasize that drilling activity in the Permian will continue to be hampered by 
infrastructure constraints—particularly lack of pipeline capacity—rising service costs, and labor 
shortages. 
We maintain our view that global oil supply and demand are now roughly in balance, and 
we continue to expect global oil consumption to grow by 1.4 million barrels a day in 2018.  So 
when you put all of this in context, we’ve got relative balance in global supply and demand.    
We’ve got constraints to shale production growth.  It’s not that producers here need any more 
motivation to produce more.  There’s a limit to how much, physically, they can produce.  There’s 
a lack of long-lived project spending, which has been going on now for six or seven years, and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
108 of 219


 
 
 
we’ve got continued global demand growth.  We think this should lead to continued price 
volatility.  And at this point, we are particularly vulnerable to an upward price shock, particularly 
if the United States presses and is successful in causing Iran’s exports to be substantially 
curtailed. 
Right now, our own judgment is, the market is assuming that we’re going to lose only 
about 250,000 barrels a day from Iran exports.  As they export 2½ million barrels, that could 
easily be more.  It would not surprise us to wake up one day and see the price spike up because 
of either some miscalculation or other issue with Iran that curtails their exports.  So we are 
worried about tariffs, but we probably add to the watch-out list this issue of a sudden price spike 
in oil.  It may not happen.  We’re hopeful that it won’t, but we’re vulnerable to it. 
Now, our analysis also suggests that in the short run—obviously, it goes without 
saying—it’ll hurt consumers.  If you go a little bit longer in the medium term, because the United 
States is approaching energy independence—we’re not there yet, but we’re going a long way—
this will ultimately be balanced out by higher cap-ex and higher activity in the oil and gas sector, 
not without some political stress.  But in the short run, I think it’s just something to be aware of, 
because you could see it bite one of these days, particularly if there’s some type of 
miscalculation or depending on how these geopolitical issues unfold. 
Regarding the U.S. economy, it’s our expectation still that real GDP growth in the United 
States will be approximately 2.9 percent in 2018.  That’s similar to our outlook at the previous 
FOMC meeting.  We continue, at the Dallas Fed, to expect real GDP growth to slow in 2019 and 
taper down to potential, as was discussed earlier today by David Wilcox.  We continue to agree 
that we’re going to taper down to potential growth in 2020 as the fiscal stimulus fades and 
monetary policy accommodation is removed.  We continue to be concerned by sluggish 
July 31–August 1, 2018
109 of 219


 
 
 
workforce growth due to aging, lagging education and skill levels—which we believe are 
affecting productivity—and, as I mentioned earlier, government debt to GDP going from being a 
tailwind in 2018 and ’19 to potentially being a headwind, as was discussed in the Tealbook. 
It is our own view at the Dallas Fed that the shape of the yield curve is very consistent 
with this narrative, and we think it helps explain why the yield curve is flattening.  We can 
debate—and we do debate—what the implications are of an inversion, but it’s clear to us the 
bond market, at a minimum, is saying we are late in the business cycle.  It doesn’t mean we’re at 
the end of the cycle, but we’re late cycle, and it is raising issues, we believe, about sluggish 
outyear growth, which are worth paying attention to. 
While the unemployment rate rose from 3.8 to 4 percent in June because of an increase in 
participation, we don’t expect that to continue, and we expect the unemployment rate to fall into 
the mid-3s over the next year.  We continue, though, to have an ongoing discussion—at least my 
staff—as to the question, is there more labor slack?  People on disability.  People maybe will 
work longer than we’re expecting.  Previously incarcerated.  People who are late bloomers and 
haven’t entered the workforce and are living at home.  We’re continuing to scrub to try to ask the 
question, could we grow faster without creating inflation pressures?  I must say, I continue to be 
skeptical, but we’re continuing to ask this question to see if there’s some way, maybe, potential 
growth could increase at the moment.  As I just said, I continue to be skeptical. 
While we note that there’s little evidence of much nationwide rise in wage growth in the 
June data—and we pay attention to a lot of the wage trackers, particularly the Atlanta Fed’s 
wage growth measure—we think this puzzle is something we will continue to study, and we still 
believe that cyclical wage pressures are building.  But, again, as I mentioned earlier, our contacts 
July 31–August 1, 2018
110 of 219


 
 
 
are saying, particularly with small and midsize companies that don’t have other ways to cope 
with it, we’re going to see more wage pressure. 
Last comment on the Dallas trimmed mean inflation rate.  The last reading of the Dallas 
trimmed mean—for June—was 1.8 percent.  This will be made public on Friday.  But with some 
of the data revisions that just came out, we would expect this number to get rounded up to 1.9 
percent.  The key for us is, we now feel more strongly that by year-end, the trimmed mean 
number will hit 2 percent.  And we feel more confident of that than we did in the previous 
meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Reports received from my directors and other 
contacts were similar to those of our previous round.  Activity is strong, the labor market is tight, 
and worries about trade policy are widespread.  One indicator of the strength in demand is that 
consumers seem to be shrugging off higher energy prices.  United Airlines reported robust 
demand despite the pass-through of higher fuel prices to airline fares, and Discover Financial 
noted that consumers are spending more on gasoline but not cutting back on other purchases. 
The labor market is also strong.  Our contact at Manpower said that their managers with 
decades of experience report that conditions are as tight as they have ever seen.  Manpower is 
making some customer segmentation choices.  The business translation is that they will no 
longer accept orders from clients who are unwilling to raise wages enough to make recruitment 
feasible.  That said, Manpower reported that nominal wage growth has only picked up a little.  
Firms continue to be restrained.  Only a few say they will do whatever it takes to find workers. 
Continuing a theme from the past couple of rounds, trade policy is weighing on otherwise 
buoyant sentiment.  Midwest farmers and their bankers are concerned about crop prices that have 
July 31–August 1, 2018
111 of 219


 
 
 
in effect been driven lower by tariffs.  Outside the agricultural sector, an insurance contact with 
significant investments in middle-market companies reported that many of these firms are 
delaying investment because of trade-related uncertainty.  However, most other contacts said that 
business spending has not yet been reduced by such uncertainty. 
Regarding the national outlook, our views on growth haven’t changed much.  The strong 
incoming data led us to boost our 2018 real GDP growth forecast a touch, to 3.2 percent.  Our 
forecast for 2019 and ’20 have not changed.  We continue to expect growth to slow to 1.9 
percent by 2020, which is a shade below our estimate for potential output growth at that point.  
We also raised our unemployment rate path one-tenth in light of the recent data.  Similar to the 
Tealbook, this just reflects some adjustment at the margin between the unemployment and 
participation rates.  We haven’t changed our overall view on labor market slack. 
As an aside, I am becoming increasingly concerned about the extent of public 
misunderstanding of the difference between the incoming data on economic growth and what is 
the sustainable pace over the longer run.  I know many of us have spoken about this distinction 
in the past, but I think now is a good time to stress it even more in our public speaking.  I think 
President Bullard’s comments about lower output growth expectations are in line with this type 
of helpful commentary.  We’re going to receive some criticism as we raise rates further.  Still, 
it’s better if more people understand that our monetary policy actions are squarely aimed at 
guiding the economy along a sustainable growth path and that monetary policy can do little to 
alter that path. 
Our outlook for inflation has moved up a touch, and we now have core PCE inflation 
reaching 2.2 percent in 2020, but I think it is very unlikely that inflation will be much higher 
over the forecast period—say, above 2½ percent—on a sustained basis.  Even though many of 
July 31–August 1, 2018
112 of 219


 
 
 
our forecasts have the unemployment rate running 1 full percentage point or more below its 
natural rate, the flat Phillips curve means that this boosts inflation two- or three-tenths at most.  
And dollar appreciation and low inflation expectations are still downside factors.  So I’m not 
seeing anything in the outlook at odds with our symmetric 2 percent inflation target. 
I’d like to finish by describing some work that my staff did to analyze the slope of the 
yield curve as a recession indicator.  We started by following up on the analysis done by Eric 
Engstrom and Steve Sharpe—it was featured in the June Tealbook—and decomposing the slope 
into short- and long-term spreads.  We then used our dynamic term structure model to divide the 
2-to-10-year spread further into its component parts:  a real rate risk premium spread and an 
inflation risk premium spread.  So we’re trying to add information about the kinds of risk market 
participants are pricing. 
Like Eric and Steve, we find that the short-term spread is the most powerful predictor of 
recession risk, but the real rate and inflation risk premium spreads are also statistically 
significant.  Our model’s current estimate of recession risk over the next year is low, around 
15 percent.  So it’s close to the unconditional probability of a recession. 
This decomposition delivers another interesting insight—namely, increases in the long-
term real rate risk premium spread, which steepen the yield curve, are also associated with an 
increased risk of recession.  This means that modest increases in the yield curve slope may not 
always be a good thing.  Our estimates of the long-term real risk premium spread did rise some 
in 2013 but have been moving sideways since.  So, according to our model, the market sees this 
source of recession risk as having been pretty stable. 
I believe this exercise is a useful reminder that it’s important to take a careful look under 
the hood and understand the economic factors that underlie any particular configuration of the 
July 31–August 1, 2018
113 of 219


 
 
 
yield curve.  And no matter what any yield curve analysis tells us, we also need to look at a wide 
range of other economic indicators for corroborating evidence.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, growth in the 
Third District remained moderately positive.  Firms continue to hire, and the unemployment rate 
for our three states is converging to that of the nation.  Manufacturing continues to grow, as does 
our service sector.  The main sector that is not sharing in the overall economic expansion is 
residential investment, with little growth over this year. 
Employment growth has remained positive but has slowed, with the three-month moving-
average growth rate declining to 0.3 percent in June.  However, certain sectors, such as 
manufacturing, eds and meds, and professional and business services, are increasing employment 
at a very healthy pace.  The unemployment rate continues to decline and, at 4.3 percent, is more 
aligned with that of the nation. 
As well, we are seeing very few pockets of high unemployment, so job growth appears to 
be broadly based across the District.  Some MSAs, for example, have achieved historically low 
unemployment rates.  We are hearing increasing concerns over the shortage of labor, with firms 
making multiple offers in order to make a hire and one firm actually closing because it just 
simply couldn’t find workers.  Staffing companies are seeing strong growth as well, and 
businesses are using them as a way to test-drive workers before making a permanent hire.  Our 
directors are universally talking of nominal wage growth at their firms and are uniformly puzzled 
that this is not being picked up in the aggregate numbers. 
Manufacturing in our region is growing strongly, with our general business activity index 
well above its nonrecessionary average.  Additionally, we are seeing some of the highest 
July 31–August 1, 2018
114 of 219


 
 
 
readings on prices paid and prices received in series history.  The prices received index has not 
been this high since June 2008, and one has to go back to February 1989 to find readings on the 
prices paid index that were this elevated. 
However, firms in both manufacturing and services appear less optimistic regarding the 
future.  Tariffs are adversely affecting a number of establishments, and the ability to pass 
through increased costs for steel and aluminum seemed to vary considerably among our 
respondents.  For example, one firm is shifting over to steel made in South Korea but recognizes 
that shift is going to take time, and it’s going to hurt in the short run. 
Residential real estate is the only sector in which growth is muted.  Permits remain flat, 
and contacts in the region are not looking for much of a pickup.  Now, supply constraints are 
definitely part of the story, with available lots scarce and long waits to get building approvals.  
With the exception of Philadelphia, house prices are growing rather modestly.  However, at an 
8.4 percent increase in home prices as measured by the May CoreLogic index, the Philadelphia 
Metro Division has, for the first time since the start of the recovery, exceeded national house 
price appreciation. 
Now, regarding the national economy, I see little basis on which to quibble with the 
Board staff view, although I continue to believe that the funds rate path in the Tealbook is overly 
aggressive.  The risk to my outlook has, however, increased, and the scenario regarding the 
effects of a trade war is concerning.  Currently, we appear to be in somewhat of a “sweet spot,” 
as far as policy is concerned, but a significant rise in trade tensions could adversely affect that 
position.  So I encourage the staff to continue to monitor the possibilities of a trade war and to 
continue to provide trade war scenarios as information is received.  This type of exercise 
definitely will factor into my overall policy position.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
115 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Incoming information from business contacts 
points to continued moderate economic expansion in the Fourth District.  The Cleveland Fed 
staff’s diffusion index of economic conditions declined in July, but this was from a very high 
level in June, and the average reading so far this year exceeds last year’s average. 
Business sentiment in the District remains upbeat.  As has been true for the past couple of 
meetings, more than 40 percent of District contacts expect some improvement in business 
conditions over coming months.  The vast majority of firms report they have not changed their 
plans or revenue outlook in response to concerns about escalating trade tensions and slower 
growth abroad. 
A Cleveland staff analysis estimates that the announced tariffs on trade between China 
and the United States will have a relatively modest effect on District employment and gross state 
product, reducing each by less than 0.2 percent.  These estimates do not include effects of the 
steel and aluminum tariffs or those being discussed on autos, and, of course, the effects would be 
larger if business sentiment deteriorates in the wake of continued uncertainty about the trade 
situation. 
District labor market conditions remain strong.  For the past two months, year-over-year 
growth in payrolls has exceeded 1 percent.  This is a pickup from the average pace last year and 
earlier this year and is well above the District’s longer-run trend employment growth.  The 
District’s unemployment rate was 4.4 percent in June, nearly 1 percentage point below the 
Cleveland staff’s estimate of the District’s natural rate of unemployment. 
Firms continue to report difficulty finding workers, and this is affecting business.  A 
trucking company contact reported that his firm has idle trucks because he can’t find workers 
July 31–August 1, 2018
116 of 219


 
 
 
with commercial driver’s licenses.  A manufacturing firm tied to the auto industry reported 
hiring workers with lower qualifications, hoping to adequately train them. 
Wage pressures in the District continue to rise.  About 40 percent of contacts reported 
raising their wages within the past eight weeks.  Inflation pressures in the District continue to 
rise.  More than half the District contacts and more than two-thirds of those in manufacturing 
reported increases in nonlabor input costs in recent weeks, with some of these increases driven 
by tariffs on steel, aluminum, and lumber.  Many contacts reported they’re raising their own 
prices in response in order to maintain profit margins, and some firms said that they’ve been able 
to increase their profit margins because of strong demand. 
At the national level, the economy remains fundamentally strong.  Personal incomes are 
rising, and household balance sheets are sound.  Monetary policy and financial conditions remain 
accommodative, and fiscal policy will add to growth.  Real GDP growth picked up significantly 
in the second quarter.  Now, some of the pickup may reflect transitory factors like the surge in 
soybean exports, but both consumption and business investment were strong, suggesting some 
underlying momentum.  While growth may step down in the third quarter, over the four-quarter 
horizon, I expect growth to be above its longer-run trend—which I estimate at 2 percent. 
Labor markets continue to tighten, moving the economy further beyond maximum 
employment.  Through June, monthly payroll gains have averaged 215,000 this year, up from 
about 180,000 last year and well above trend.  The vast majority of measures show less slack in 
the labor market today than at the peak of the last expansion before the financial crisis.  Wages 
and broader compensation are beginning to accelerate, although low productivity growth is likely 
to constrain the pace of increases.  Under the growth outlook, I expect labor markets to tighten 
July 31–August 1, 2018
117 of 219


 
 
 
further and the unemployment rate to move down, and I expect that, over the forecast horizon, 
the unemployment rate will remain below its longer-run level, which I estimate at 4½ percent. 
The inflation news is positive.  Inflation continues to firm, with recent total and core PCE 
inflation readings near 2 percent.  And with measures of long-run inflation expectations broadly 
stable, I expect inflation to be sustainable near 2 percent over the medium-run horizon. 
Provided we continue to move policy rates up gradually, consistent with our June SEP, I 
see the risks to the outlook as broadly balanced.  Fiscal policy is expected to add to aggregate 
demand growth over the rest of this year and next year and is an upside risk to growth.  There 
may be some positive effect on the supply side of the economy as well, but, based on past 
episodes, these effects are usually not very large, and they occur much later. 
The trade situation is a downside risk.  In addition to the direct effects of higher tariffs, 
there could be an additional effect due to the uncertainty surrounding trade, causing firms to 
postpone and possibly cancel some planned investment.  However, at this point, the economy has 
been quite resilient in the midst of these concerns. 
With respect to inflation, on the downside, inflation has been stubbornly below target, 
and that could continue.  But the continued strengthening of output growth and labor markets 
poses upside inflation risk. 
Fiscal imbalances need to be carefully monitored at this point in the cycle.  Valuations 
are high, and, should we fail to remove monetary policy accommodation at an appropriate pace, 
financial stability risks will build. 
I do not find compelling arguments that the flattening of the yield curve in and of itself 
should influence our policy choices.  If the economy gets hit by a sizable negative shock—say, 
the bad trade scenario is realized—we will experience it in the context of a relatively flat yield 
July 31–August 1, 2018
118 of 219


 
 
 
curve.  Now, some will say, “See, the yield curve was flat, and we got a recession.”  They will 
add another data point to those wanting to argue for a causal link and a structural relationship, 
and it will frustrate me.  [Laughter] 
Now, I acknowledge that there is a correlation between the slope of the yield curve and 
recessions.  This correlation isn’t difficult to understand.  The yield curve flattens when we begin 
to tighten monetary policy.  Because long-term yields reflect expectations of future short-term 
interest rates, when the market expects the tightening to stop and perhaps be replaced by an 
easing, the yield curve can invert.  This happens late in the cycle, which, by the way, is also 
when—almost by definition—recessions happen. 
Today there are reasons to believe that the relationship between the slope of the yield 
curve and the state of the business cycle has changed.  For example, estimates of the term 
premium embedded in long yields are lower than in the past.  Note that our asset purchases were 
intended to do precisely that.  And Tealbook B gives estimates that they’re currently lowering 
the 10-year Treasury term premium by 78 basis points. 
At the very least, we need to redefine the slope at which we begin to get concerned.  In 
any event, the message I take from the correlation is that, instead of curtailing gradual increases 
in the policy rate in the midst of a very positive outlook merely to avoid a yield curve inversion, 
we need to base our policy decisions on the medium-run outlook and strive to avoid the situation 
of getting behind the curve and having to play catch-up by raising short-term rates aggressively, 
engendering both a significant inversion of the yield curve and a recession.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
119 of 219


 
 
 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I continue to be optimistic about the 
outlook.  Yes, the bump-up in growth in the second qurter seems likely to fade.  But, like 
many—if not most—of you, I think the underlying pace of real GDP growth this year is going to 
remain solid, supported by fiscal policy, strong investment, and favorable financial conditions. 
Despite many anecdotal reports of difficulties in hiring, it’s been hard to identify signals 
of binding constraints on growth in the aggregate data.  Inflation pressures remain subdued.  
Wage growth, although picking up, still remains well below the pre-crisis norm. 
It was encouraging that the increase in the unemployment rate that we observed in June 
reflected higher labor force participation.  Even this far into the recovery, only a year away from 
being the longest expansion on record, labor force participation remains depressed in some key 
demographic groups, including particularly prime-age males, for reasons that aren’t well 
understood.  But a recovery in participation in these groups would provide considerably more 
slack in the labor market and allow the economy even more room to run. 
That said, I do think that we should continue to be open to signs besides inflation that the 
economy is overheating.  As I mentioned last time, there are risks in pushing the economy into a 
place it doesn’t want to go.  Generally, we have relied primarily on inflation as a warning of the 
economy’s discomfort.  But we should be open to the possibility that the signal value of inflation 
has diminished recently or at least may be arriving with a considerable lag. 
As such, we should be attendant to other indicators of constraints in overheating, in 
addition to inflation.  Put another way, while I think that there’s enough doubt around our 
measure of labor slack that we should not feel compelled to accelerate our tightening pace, I also 
think that there’s enough doubt about inflation as an infallibly reliable measure of resource 
July 31–August 1, 2018
120 of 219


 
 
 
constraints that neither should we slow our pace.  Like pilots back in the days of radio beacons, 
don’t chase the needles. 
A significant increase in trade tensions remains a risk, though one that I think has 
diminished following last week’s agreement with the EU and with the progress that appears to be 
being made in the NAFTA discussions before the end of the summer.  Although the tariffs and 
retaliatory measures implemented so far are clearly meaningful for certain firms and industries, it 
seems unlikely that their effect on the overall economy is all that large.  Investment remains 
strong.  Surveys continue to show elevated sentiment among businesses and manufacturers. 
Now, of course, a full-on trade war, as illustrated by Steve’s presentation, could have 
severe implications for the economy, depressing near-term growth but also negatively affecting 
productivity, in part as the complex and integrated supply chains that underlie modern 
manufacturing begin to unravel, with consequences that are very difficult to predict.  At this 
point, however, that prospect would seem to be fairly remote. 
And just a word on the yield curve.  I, for one, am not overly concerned about a potential 
inversion of the yield curve.  Notwithstanding the predictive record of inversions for recessions 
in the United States, the evidence in foreign economies is considerably more mixed, suggesting 
that the link between inversions and recessions is not an immutable law of the universe.  
Additionally, there are reasons to believe that the present signal coming from the yield curve is 
likely being distorted by both our own large balance sheet and an increased global demand for 
safe assets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
121 of 219


 
 
 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The economy remains quite strong.  I note 
especially second-quarter consumer spending and the continuing growth of employment at a rate 
well above population growth.  And, as expected, inflation has come in at target. 
The Fifth District economy is in a similar place.  Our manufacturing and service indexes 
are quite high, and there are growing signs of supply constraints, rising transportation costs, 
shipping delays, and input cost increases.  The theme of supply constraints carries over to the 
tight labor market, in which a shortage of qualified labor is the dominant concern for many firms, 
and some reference service-level challenges.  Our regional surveys don’t yet show widespread 
acceleration of end-user pricing, but their expectations for the future are rising.  We’ll see. 
Like many of you, we’ve been digging into tariffs, recognizing that their duration and 
endgame are uncertain.  I would say the price effect is real and pretty immediate.  The headline 
example is steel and aluminum prices, covering not just the price of imports but also domestic 
producers, who, we’re told, have raised their prices at the same time. 
More broadly, as President Bostic said, any intermediate goods tariffs give producers 
confidence or cover to move prices.  And even the toughest customers, some of whom we’ve 
talked to, tell us they’re poking through invoices—they’re not going to accept much, but they 
know, in the end, they’re going to have to accept the pass-through of tariffs. 
In contrast, we’ve talked to many who are facing tariffs abroad, and they see coming 
oversupply.  Indeed, the most pessimistic executives I’ve met in my seven months here were 
those leading a major pork producer who reported significant drops in livestock prices and, I 
guess, doesn’t quite know what to do with a lot of excess pigs.  [Laughter] 
With effects in both directions, I don’t see much net effect on inflation, and this seems to 
match with the Tealbook baseline.  But while the longer-term employment and investment 
July 31–August 1, 2018
122 of 219


 
 
 
effects of these tariffs are uncertain, I do believe that the medium-term effects on employment 
and investment will be negative. 
Supply chains are costly to reconfigure.  Reconfiguration requires a lot of capital.  Moves 
are hard to reverse.  The uncertainty of the endgame means most executives tell me they have 
little option but to wait and see.  In the interim, they tell me new investments are unlikely.  And 
if your product is being tariffed, you will cut back employment on the margin while waiting to 
see how things play out. 
More broadly, today is budget season.  CFOs are setting their revenue targets and 
investment guidelines for 2019.  As I speak to them, I ask them about their posture, and what I 
hear is that the tariff conversation is introducing a note of caution into what otherwise might be 
an aggressive plan.  This runs the risk of damping growth next year. 
Another potential effect of tariffs is on the banking system.  The prevalence of contract 
farming in our District highlights the potential for spillovers from protracted trade conflict into 
agricultural lending.  
Regarding the yield curve, like many of you, I have followed its day-to-day movements 
with some interest.  In the past, the relationship between yield curve inversion and recession in 
the United States has been remarkable.  However, we have been digging into the question of 
whether low term premiums may have implications for what the yield curve tells us today, and 
many of us have talked about the same topic. 
In each of the past four business cycle expansions, the term premium has fallen to 
successively lower levels and is currently negative.  All else being equal, a lower term premium 
will imply a greater likelihood of inversion.  And under standard assumptions, a zero term 
premium would imply a yield curve inversion roughly half the time. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
123 of 219


 
 
 
I’d note that the one false positive in the U.S. data in 1966 occurred at a time when the 
term premium had been fluctuating around zero for several years.  This point receives additional 
support in international data.  The Tealbook box shows a weaker relationship between recession 
and inversion in other industrialized countries, in which term premiums both are lower than in 
the United States and have declined from 1990 to 2009, as shown in work by Jonathan Wright in 
the American Economic Review.  All of this is to say there remains a great deal we don’t 
understand, and our stance on the yield curve might be driven by the extent to which we believe 
the low term premium itself is sending us a message. 
While the yield curve and trade policy uncertainty have raised concerns about downside 
risks, a wide range of labor market indicators point to the risk of overheating.  So I continue to 
watch nominal wage growth with interest.  Our contacts clearly believe the labor market is tight, 
and wage increases are notable for new hires and for occupations like truck drivers, nurses, and 
construction.  Yet overall wage increases are still only in the high 2 percent range.  As I’ve said 
before, turnover matters.  And to see substantial wage increases, we need to have higher turnover 
that would motivate higher increases for people who are job stayers. 
I might note that corporations are focused on employee engagement today as they never 
were before.  And if you think that what they’re doing is sensible, you might say that some of 
these engagement efforts effectively increase costs while not directly raising the wages that we 
measure, things like training, or better facilities, or ropes courses, or one contact who has started 
“Beer-Cart Fridays.”  I would point out that “Beer-Cart Fridays” are a better predictor of future 
recessions than yield curve inversions.  [Laughter] 
It also seems reasonable that some of these efforts are helping firms retain workers and 
thus limiting the extent to which the tight labor market is driving increased attrition and, 
July 31–August 1, 2018
124 of 219


 
 
 
therefore, increased compensation for job stayers.  And, of course, there are limits.  By the time 
we start to see “Beer-Cart Wednesdays,” we might be in recession.  [Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Acting President Gould. 
MR. GOULD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s an honor to be here, and I recognize I 
have big shoes to fill with John Williams’s departure.  In John’s specific case, that means dozens 
of pairs of sneakers in any conceivable color and design.  [Laughter]  But I’ll do my best not to 
embarrass him—or myself, for that matter. 
The national economy continues to power along.  Even smoothing through the second-
quarter surge, real GDP is expanding well beyond its potential rate.  Similarly, employment 
growth continues to surpass its underlying sustainable pace, which is especially impressive this 
far along in the expansion.  We expect the unemployment rate to fall further, bottoming out 
around 3½ percent toward the middle part of next year, and this labor market strength should 
support ongoing gains in wages and salaries. 
One potential downside risk to the outlook comes from rising trade frictions.  While 
concerned, my District contacts have not yet seen significant negative effects, and they remain 
hopeful that trade tensions will abate.  There is also risk that the effect of the ongoing federal 
fiscal stimulus will fall short of consensus expectations because of the limitations imposed by an 
economy that’s already booming. 
On the other hand, the upside risks are readily apparent, with an economy that keeps 
delivering positive surprises.  Similar to several other comments, my business contacts are more 
worried about finding qualified workers for their job openings than by other threats to the 
expansion.  Twelfth District labor markets are sufficiently tight, but small businesses in some 
sectors have scaled back their expansion plans. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
125 of 219


 
 
 
In the Bay Area, one restaurant recently shuttered three locations after being unable to 
maintain sufficient staffing to keep them open and profitable.  This is remarkable but perhaps not 
surprising, as the unemployment rate in California is already at a low not seen since the 
late 1960s. 
On the flip side, very tight labor markets have been bolstering labor force attachment 
nationally, causing the participation rate to rise.  This cyclical recovery has offset the downward 
pressure coming from the “silver tsunami” of retiring baby boomers.  On balance, this has held 
the participation rate overall largely constant over the past four years.  New analysis by my staff 
suggests that participation has essentially returned to its long-run trend.  So, looking ahead, this 
means that additional cyclical increases are unlikely.  Instead, we will begin to see the iron 
arithmetic of the baby-boom retirements show up in a gradually declining participation rate.  
This conclusion is in line with separate findings of the Board staff, the CBO, and others. 
In separate work, my staff also explored some of the factors that have been holding down 
labor force participation beyond the effects of an aging population.  They found the 
disappearance of traditional blue-collar jobs in manufacturing, due largely to outsourcing and 
automation, explains about half the decline in prime-age participation since the year 2000. 
In conjunction with other research on declining prime-age participation, this work tells us 
not to expect a reversal of the underlying downward trend in participation.  Overall, I see a 
national labor market and economy that are operating beyond potential and expected to stride 
further past it over the next several years.  Inflation is already close to target, and growing 
resource constraints are likely to push it up further.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
126 of 219


 
 
 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Labor shortages and trade policy concerns 
remain prominent themes from our business contacts in the Tenth District.  Employment growth 
in the region has increased over the past six months in every major industry, with labor shortages 
cited by many District firms, particularly for low- and medium-skilled workers.  These firms 
report that a lack of applicants is their primary challenge filling positions, followed by a lack of 
technical competency. 
Construction activity is strong, with multifamily and industrial completions near levels 
last experienced in 2000.  And our manufacturing and services surveys continue to indicate solid 
levels of activity, with many survey respondents reporting higher input prices as a result of 
tariffs, including higher prices for lumber, aluminum, steel, and other metals. 
Consistent with the ongoing expansion, we are seeing state tax receipts across the region 
continue to rise.  And, although state budgets look healthier than a year ago, longer-term 
challenges continue to face legislators as they weigh the need for higher spending on public 
health and public pensions with constituents’ demands for more education and transportation 
funding. 
Energy activity continued to expand in the second quarter, according to our energy 
survey, and expectations about activity over the next six months were also quite optimistic.  Our 
contacts tell us that the oil price needed to substantially increase drilling rose to $69 per barrel, 
compared with $56 per barrel a year ago, in part because of rising oilfield costs.  Finally, the 
agricultural sector has weakened further since the previous meeting, as the price of corn and 
soybeans dropped sharply. 
Regarding the national economy, my outlook is little changed since our previous meeting.  
Although trade policy issues remain in focus, my baseline does not incorporate effects of 
July 31–August 1, 2018
127 of 219


 
 
 
proposed tariffs or trade policy uncertainty.  Last week’s second-quarter GDP estimate points to 
continued strong economic activity.  And with output moving further above potential, I expect 
the unemployment rate to tick down somewhat below 4 percent in the second half of the year. 
As labor markets tighten and reports of labor shortages grow, I continue to look at 
resource utilization measures for signs of labor supply constraints along the lines highlighted by 
the staff’s analysis in Tealbook A’s alternative view box. 
Employment growth over the past few years was enabled in part by a rising labor force 
participation rate of prime-age women.  As their participation rate flattened about a year ago, 
rising participation by prime-age men allowed for continuing strong employment growth for 
about six months.  Since the start of 2018, however, the participation rate for prime-age men has 
also flattened.  Unless we see the participation rate of one of these groups resume its rise, it 
seems unlikely that we will continue to see strong employment gains for much longer.  And 
although it is certainly possible that more prime-age workers will find employment, it’s worth 
noting that the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age women has fully returned to pre-
recession levels.  And the same ratio for prime-age men, who face structural employment 
headwinds, has recovered 80 percent of its recessionary decline. 
Understanding these labor market dynamics is important in judging the signals for wage 
growth measures relative to past expansions and what the moderate pace of wage growth tells us 
about the cyclical position of the economy.  Certainly, a tightening labor market should boost 
wage growth, but I increasingly see other factors weighing on wage acceleration, including 
slower structural productivity growth during this expansion, a longer-term decline in the labor 
share of income—which has fallen in the business sector from 63 percent in 2000 to 56½ percent 
July 31–August 1, 2018
128 of 219


 
 
 
in 2017—and nominal wage rigidities.  These crosscurrents in the wage data lead me to put more 
weight on direct measures of labor utilization than on wages. 
Finally, measures of consumer price inflation have increased this year and place inflation 
more squarely at the Committee’s objective than it has been for some years, and I see upside risk 
to inflation.  Rapid increases in raw materials costs are likely to pass through to output prices.  
The ISM input price index for manufacturing in recent months has been at its highest in seven 
years.  Likewise, the index for prices paid by nonmanufacturing firms has risen in the past year.  
Firms increasingly plan to pass on the higher costs to consumers, as noted in the NFIB survey of 
small businesses, in which the percentage of firms planning to raise their selling prices moved up 
this year to its highest level of the expansion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Moderate growth continues in the Ninth 
District.  Most industries we talked to are expanding, especially manufacturing and multifamily 
residential construction, but sharp declines in corn and soybean prices are hurting the ag sector.  
Firms continue to report strong hiring activity but anecdotally continue to report difficulty 
finding workers, as the rest of you reported.  There’s some evidence of rising prices, especially 
for freight and logistics.   
Regarding the national economy, solid growth continues:  strong second-quarter real 
GDP growth of 4.1 percent.  There’s no evidence yet of a slowdown in job growth, which 
continues at around 200,000 jobs a month.  Labor force participation has edged up further, but 
prime-age LFP remains notably below pre-recession levels. 
Inflation has inched up since our previous meeting:  Core PCE inflation is now at 1.9 
percent.  Inflation expectations have not moved very much, and, similarly, there has not been 
July 31–August 1, 2018
129 of 219


 
 
 
much change in measured nominal wage growth, growing at around 2.7 or 2.8 percent in 
nominal terms, depending on your measure.  Such slow wage growth is hard to reconcile with 
the view that current employment is unsustainably high. 
I talk to, as I’m sure you do, a lot of labor economists around the country.  And when I 
talk to both conservative and liberal labor economists, they both tell me the same thing:  If the 
economy is creating jobs at 200,000 a month consistently in a modest wage growth environment, 
we’re not at maximum employment.  I find it interesting that both sides of the aisle are telling me 
the same thing, and it’s pretty remarkable how consistent the 200,000 jobs a month is. 
The discussion of capacity constraints to the economy reminds me of the discussion of 
peak oil about a decade ago.  You know, at some point the world will reach its limit of how 
much oil it can produce.  The idea that we’re at a capacity constraint that doesn’t show up in the 
price strikes me as pretty farfetched.  If we are actually bumping up against capacity constraints 
in the U.S. economy, it needs to show up in inflation, or it needs to show up in wage growth—or 
it’s just an imaginary concept.  I just don’t know what a capacity constraint is, absent 
price growth. 
Now, regarding financial markets and the yield curve, there’s been a lot of discussion of 
it.  To me, whether there’s a causal mechanism is less important than what it’s telling us about 
the neutral rate.  First of all, the notion of a causal mechanism—to me, it’s, do we believe 
monetary policy affects the real economy?  If we believe monetary policy affects the real 
economy, when we raise rates, we remove accommodation and that flattens the yield curve; 
when we move to a contractionary stance, that inverts the yield curve, and we can cause a 
recession. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
130 of 219


 
 
 
I don’t think that that mechanism is that mysterious, so, to me, the most important thing 
about the yield curve right now is that it’s telling us that we’re close to neutral.  And if inflation 
expectations were picking up or if real growth prospects were picking up, they would be showing 
up as a higher longer-term interest rate, and they’re not. 
What I’m nervous about is our SEP path.  The median dot plot is showing us blowing 
through neutral and moving to a contractionary policy stance, which will also mean an inverted 
yield curve.  I’m less concerned about the inverted yield curve than the fact that we’re going to 
move to a contractionary policy stance.  And unless we see wage growth pick up or inflation 
expectations pick up, I don’t see any justification for moving to a contractionary policy stance.  
That’s where my concern lies. 
In summary, we’re very close to our inflation target.  I think there’s still slack in the labor 
market, and I think we’re close to neutral.  I am cautious about wanting to move to a 
contractionary stance.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data indicate the 
U.S. economy remains quite strong, with significant momentum entering this quarter.  After 
stumbling a bit in the first quarter, consumer spending looks again to be off to the races, and 
business fixed investment also remains on a strong upward trajectory. 
Consistent with the spending numbers, labor market conditions continue to strengthen.  
Payroll employment increases over recent months have been well above levels needed to 
maintain a stable unemployment rate over the longer run.  The job openings rate remains near its 
historical high, and other indicators point to a very strong labor market. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
131 of 219


 
 
 
Regarding inflation, the 12-month percent change in the core PCE price index is near our 
objective of 2 percent.  It should continue to remain there for the rest of the year. 
So, taken together, the recent data point to a picture of an economy that’s heating up even 
as we progressively remove policy accommodation.  Fiscal policy is providing significant 
stimulus, and, as the Tealbook emphasizes, the trend in global real GDP growth remains positive.  
I expect U.S. real GDP growth to be about 3¼ percent this year and to moderate to about 2½ 
percent in 2019, still far above my estimate of 1¾ percent for potential growth. 
So, consistent with this strong outlook for growth, I anticipate the unemployment rate 
will edge down to a touch below 3½ percent by next year, well below my estimate of the natural 
rate of unemployment, and I see unemployment remaining around 3½ percent through 2020.  
That’s the strongest labor market we will have seen in 50 years. 
With such a sustained tight labor market, I expect wage and price inflation to pick up 
further, producing a modest overshooting of our 2 percent objective in the next couple of years.  
And, so far at least, there are no incipient signs of a more rapid takeoff in inflation. 
I see the risks to the outlooks for both real activity and inflation as balanced over the 
medium term.  One upside risk to real GDP growth, which has already been mentioned, is that 
we may be underestimating the strength of the tailwinds that have been driving the stronger-than-
expected growth that we’ve been seeing. 
Counterbalancing this are two downside risks, one from the deterioration of international 
trade relationships and a second from a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the housing sector.  
Now, the Tealbook alternative scenario nicely illustrates some of the risks associated with a trade 
meltdown.  Many others have talked about that today, so I won’t go into that further.  I will make 
a few comments about the possibility of a sharper-than-expected cooling of the housing sector. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
132 of 219


 
 
 
Although house prices continue to rise, housing construction and sales appear to be 
showing signs of the adverse effects from increases in interest rates.  Real residential investment 
fell in the second quarter, and housing starts, new home sales, and existing home sales have all 
declined of late, likely in part because of declining affordability, as both home prices and 
mortgage interest rates have increased.  Although the medium-term fundamentals of the housing 
sector still look favorable, recent developments should prompt a little caution in this optimism. 
Finally, I would like to raise an issue that may present significant challenges for us down 
the road—one that President Kaplan referred to—and that is the possibility of a reversal in fiscal 
policy in a couple of years.  Now, I won’t mention any cartoon characters but will instead point 
to the latest CBO current-law baseline, which shows that nominal discretionary outlays are 
essentially unchanged in fiscal year 2020 because of the reimposition of spending caps.  This 
follows projected increases of nearly 5 percent in fiscal 2018 and nearly 6 percent in fiscal 2019, 
and this pattern represents a significant reversal of fiscal stimulus that would reverberate 
throughout the economy.  Now, the Tealbook projection assumes that such a sharp deceleration 
in federal spending won’t materialize.  Nonetheless, it goes without saying that it is hard to 
predict how political and other factors could influence fiscal policy in the future, and we should 
keep this risk on our collective radar.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks for all your comments.  I will add a 
few of my own.  Overall, I see the baseline outlook as remaining quite strong.  While downside 
risks may have increased just a bit, I continue to see the risks overall as roughly in balance. 
First-half data say that real GDP growth appears to have accelerated this year and is 
running at a pace of around 3 percent, well above potential GDP growth.  The second-quarter 
headline number was likely inflated by transient factors, but the underlying signal of continued 
July 31–August 1, 2018
133 of 219


 
 
 
growth remains strong, consistent with healthy fundamentals and ongoing strength in household 
spending and business fixed investment. 
The labor market, too, has strengthened.  Payroll gains have accelerated this year to 
215,000 per month, a level even further above trend labor force growth.  Modest upside surprises 
in participation have limited the decline in the unemployment rate, which, at 4 percent, is now 
only three-tenths lower than a year ago despite quite strong job growth.  Participation has moved 
around in a fairly tight range now for almost five years. 
Offsetting the overall aging trend has been an ongoing rise in participation among 
different age groups.  Time will tell how long that pattern can sustain itself, but, for now, I’m 
open to the possibility that it may reflect some structural factors, such as the continued rise in 
educational attainment of the workforce, in addition to cyclical factors. 
Many of the indicators that we consult are consistent with a labor force that is at or 
beyond maximum sustainable employment.  Still, prime-age labor force participation remains 
below 2007 levels, especially for men, and there’s been no meaningful or sustained acceleration 
in wages over the past couple of years.  These factors continue to suggest that the labor market is 
at least not overheated. 
Regarding prices, the data have come in largely as anticipated, with headline and core 
inflation running near 2 percent.  Lower readings on the Dallas trimmed mean and other 
indicators suggest that transitory factors may be pushing inflation up a bit, although I hear 
President Kaplan’s forecast that the Dallas trimmed mean is returning to 2 percent.  So while 
recent readings are much improved, they’re not yet fully consistent with our goal of inflation 
moving for a sustained period in a range with 2 percent as its center. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
134 of 219


 
 
 
The news on economic activity abroad has been a bit more mixed, as overall growth has 
slowed slightly, reflecting a broad softening among emerging market economies amid tightening 
financial conditions.  Incoming data for the advanced foreign economies are generally consistent 
with the staff’s earlier assessment that the first-quarter softness was mostly transitory. 
Regarding the risks, the upside surprises in domestic output and payrolls suggest that 
growth this year may turn out to be even stronger than anticipated, particularly as fiscal policy 
support arrives.  Trade policy developments, however, represent an offsetting downside risk.  A 
trade war has the potential to slow down growth while pushing inflation up, as illustrated by the 
high trade barriers in the alternative scenario discussed in the Tealbook.  The outcomes of our 
various trade disputes with our major trading partners remain so uncertain that it’s not yet 
appropriate to incorporate them in the baseline.  And the recent apparent rapprochement with the 
EU was unexpected and may be a positive development, but leaves many questions unresolved.  
It remains a risk that uncertainty could undermine confidence, leading businesses to hold off on 
investment or hiring. 
While the stated purpose of the exercise is lower tariffs, there is a risk that these 
confrontations may ultimately produce a more protectionist trend, disrupting supply chains and 
reducing trade.  If that does happen, it is likely to lead over time to lower productivity, slower 
growth, and lower incomes.  On the international front, monetary policy normalization and trade 
tensions represent rising risks to emerging market economies.  Taking all of that on board, I see 
the risks to the outlook as having tipped perhaps slightly to the negative but as still roughly 
balanced. 
Looking ahead to tomorrow’s discussion, this year both growth and job creation have 
accelerated, and inflation is running close to target.  The real federal funds rate is still slightly 
July 31–August 1, 2018
135 of 219


 
 
 
negative and well below most estimates of its longer-run neutral level.  I view these conditions as 
consistent with continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate.  While the outlook is 
perhaps a bit more uncertain, I view that as reinforcing the wisdom of moving gradually. 
We can afford to leave the target rate unchanged at this meeting and see how events play 
out between now and September.  If things do turn out roughly as expected, I would likely see it 
as appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate another notch at that meeting. 
And now that’s the end of our round.  I suggest that we proceed with Thomas’s monetary 
policy briefing before breaking for our reception and dinner.  Thomas, over to you. 
MR. LAUBACH.6  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m afraid I didn’t prepare to fill 
the hour to five o’clock.  [Laughter]  But I’ll do my best.  I will be referring to the 
“Material for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 
Following the significant changes you made to your postmeeting statement in 
June, alternative B at this meeting is a straightforward update of that statement.  
Assuming that you will adopt this alternative tomorrow, I will focus in my briefing on 
an issue that you will likely be confronting before too long.  Today all three 
alternatives continue to state that “the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative.”  Should the federal funds rate continue to rise over time along a 
path similar to the median path of participants’ June SEP submissions, you will need 
to decide at what point your statement should stop characterizing the stance of 
monetary policy as remaining accommodative.  In this connection, I will also briefly 
touch on historical experience of raising the federal funds rate into restrictive territory 
and associated communications issues. 
The most recent time the Committee faced this decision was 2005.  One of the 
Tealbook boxes reviews the Committee’s discussions before it ceased to characterize 
the policy stance as “accommodative” in the December 2005 statement.  As you 
recall, the Committee raised the federal funds rate target from 1 percent to 4 percent 
between June 2004 and November 2005, and the accompanying FOMC statements 
continued to refer to monetary policy as accommodative.  Early in the tightening 
cycle, there was broad consensus among Committee participants that monetary policy 
was accommodative, because the real federal funds rate was below most estimates of 
the neutral real federal funds rate at the time. 
At the November 2005 meeting, the staff reported that indicators of the economy, 
including those shown in the top-left panel, had generally moved toward full resource 
utilization over the course of 2005.  At that meeting, participants discussed 
 
6 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
July 31–August 1, 2018
136 of 219


 
 
 
extensively the appropriateness of continuing to characterize the stance of monetary 
policy as accommodative.  As shown to the right, the real interest rate, the black line, 
had reached the lower end of a range of model-based estimates of its neutral level, the 
red shaded region.  Participants agreed that the usefulness of references to policy 
being “accommodative” had run its course, either because monetary policy was, in 
fact, no longer accommodative or because the uncertainties surrounding their 
estimates of the neutral rate were sufficiently large that an implicit reference to a 
neutral rate level was no longer helpful.  At the December meeting, all FOMC 
members agreed to adjust the language in the statement. 
Expectations of market participants for the postmeeting statements broadly 
tracked the evolution in the Committee’s views.  The Desk’s Survey of Primary 
Dealers showed that for much of 2005, only a few survey respondents expected a 
change in the “accommodative” language in the next statement, but expectations for 
such a change firmed up following the release of the November minutes.  By the time 
of the December Survey of Primary Dealers, more than three-fourths of the 
respondents expected the FOMC to change the characterization of the stance of 
monetary policy.  Following the release of the postmeeting statement, investors 
appeared to interpret the removal as a sign that the end of the tightening cycle might 
be closer than they thought, and policy rate expectations beyond the near term edged 
down. 
The top-left panel paints a picture of the economy in late 2005 in which gaps—for 
output, unemployment, and the real rate—uniformly appeared to be closing.  
Nonetheless, as noted in the middle-left panel, signs of upside inflation pressures 
were apparent in higher near-term inflation expectations and rising energy prices.  As 
a result, the Committee signaled that “some further measured policy firming” would 
likely be needed to damp these inflationary pressures.  The economic situation today 
is different.  Core PCE inflation has finally moved up near 2 percent and the real 
federal funds rate is approaching the bottom of a range of estimates of its neutral 
level.  But the unemployment rate is well below most estimates of its longer-run level 
and is anticipated to remain below it through 2020.  The Committee may wish to raise 
the federal funds rate above its neutral level in the current tightening cycle to prevent 
resource utilization pressures from building further, balancing upside risks to inflation 
and possibly financial stability risks against the risk that the economy could tip into 
recession or that inflation would run persistently below 2 percent. 
What is the risk that raising the federal funds rate above its neutral level might be 
followed by a recession?  In an attempt to answer this question, the middle-right 
panel provides a historical perspective by plotting the real federal funds rate, the 
black line, against the range spanned by five statistical estimates of the neutral rate 
since the early 1980s, the blue shaded region.  The red dashed line shows the real rate 
gap, calculated as the actual real federal funds rate minus the mean of the five neutral 
rate estimates.  As shown by the red dots, four quarters before the onset of each of the 
past three recessions, the real rate gap exceeded 50 basis points.  That said, the second 
half of the 1990s was a prolonged period when monetary policy was restrictive 
according to this metric, yet the economy kept expanding. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
137 of 219


 
 
 
The bottom-left panel plots predictions from a model that uses the estimated real 
rate gap shown in the middle right to predict the probability that the economy will 
enter a recession at some point over the next four quarters.  The model is estimated 
over the period from 1960 through the first quarter of this year.  The predicted 
recession probability did increase notably before the three most recent recessions, 
though never above 40 percent.  The modest variation in recession probabilities as the 
real rate gap increases suggests that estimates of the real rate do not provide much 
guidance on how far it is prudent to raise the federal funds rate. 
In the current environment, characterizing the stance of monetary policy as 
“accommodative” implicitly provides guidance on the direction of the policy rate.  As 
noted in the bottom-right panel, the challenge is to communicate how far the federal 
funds rate might be raised without significantly increasing the vulnerability of the 
economy to adverse shocks.  As I mentioned earlier, when removing the 
“accommodative” language in December 2005, the Committee added the phrase that 
“some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed.”  At the time, investors 
had placed high odds on a couple of more hikes beyond that meeting.  At present, the 
statement expresses the expectation that “further gradual increases in the target range 
. . . will be consistent” with the attainment of your objectives.  A question that you 
will likely be confronting is for how much longer this language remains consistent 
with your policy intentions and your SEP submissions, and how you may want to 
amend your statement as you approach economic conditions at which you think this 
tightening cycle will end. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks; the June 
statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 9 of the handout.  I will 
be happy to take any questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Questions?  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I just want to make sure I heard you right.  You said it isn’t that useful 
to estimate—did you mean the neutral rate or the real rate?  You said the real rate.  I don’t know 
if you mean that or the neutral rate. 
MR. LAUBACH.  No, the real rate gap. 
MR. KAPLAN.  The gap. 
MR. LAUBACH.  It’s simply, as you can tell, not— 
MR. KAPLAN.  You’re saying not very indicative. 
MR. LAUBACH.  —not an informative predictor. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Okay.  Got it. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
138 of 219


 
 
 
MR. LAUBACH.  Not enormously informative— 
MR. EVANS.  Why do you say that?  What are you pointing to when you say that? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I would conclude that on the basis of the rather modest variation in the 
probabilities here.  I mean, this is quite different, say, from the standard charts.  If you think of 
these types of charts that we show you when we use measures of the yield spread or things like 
that, we typically see that the spikes in recession probabilities before recessions move much 
higher—say, up to 80 percent or something like that.  Whereas here, this variation—say, from 
20 to 40 percent—is rather modest in comparison with other recession predictors. 
MR. EVANS.  Well, we could probably have a long discussion about that.  You’re 
putting a lot of weight on your probit model as your indicator of whether it’s useful, whereas the 
right-center chart sort of shows that policy is above your range of the neutral rate, and then you 
take into account the fact that you’re in a mature expansion.  You’re looking at other data as 
well.  The red dots seem reasonable to me in the sense that you’ve got policy that’s not 
accommodative.  I don’t know how restrictive it is.  It just seems like we could have a much 
longer conversation about this before dismissing the usefulness of that, in my opinion. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I agree that the red dots, of course, tell you the story that, yes, the real 
rate gap was positive four quarters before the onset of recession.  I suspect what is behind the 
fact that the probability doesn’t go up all that high is that, if you want a number of false 
positives—in particular, in the mid-’90s you had a prolonged period when the real rate gap was 
at approximately the same level, yet the economy kept expanding. 
Obviously, there is some level—and, again, I’m omitting here the earlier history of these 
theories, right?  If you look back to the 1970s, clearly you see real rate gap levels of such a 
July 31–August 1, 2018
139 of 219


 
 
 
magnitude that it’s quite plausible that that real rate gap, in fact, was important in inducing a 
recession.  But over this period here, it’s not particularly compelling. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Even if the results are not that strong, I do think that 
this chart that you show is actually helpful for a lot of the discussion that we have, because we 
tend to focus so much on the issue of the yield curve.  I think what we’re really talking about is, 
is monetary policy so tight that it contributes to recessions?  I actually do find this useful. 
I actually have a different comment, and that was on the box on the removal of the 
“remains accommodative” language in 2005, which was very helpful.  You made reference to it.  
But you said something—and it’s also in the written version of what you said—that I wanted to 
probe a little bit.  And that’s this idea that there was some market reaction to the post–December 
2005 FOMC meeting.  In the event study, longer-term yields came down, and there was some 
reaction. 
Do you think that today, the SEP interest rate numbers that come out every quarter might 
solve some of this problem about how market participants interpret this change of language?  In 
other words, if we have the median dot showing whatever it’s showing in terms of a rise in 
interest rates, that would maybe trump removing some of this language?  Because back in 2005, 
obviously, we didn’t have the interest rate projections.  How should I think about that? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I would first quibble with one of the premises.  I would look at these 
reactions here that are shown in the Tealbook as very small. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  No, I know. 
MR. LAUBACH.  So it didn’t seem that that was a major misunderstanding in terms of— 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  But there was a worry about it. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
140 of 219


 
 
 
MR. LAUBACH.  It’s true, of course, that now the SEP dots are in the information set of 
market participants, and they would certainly look to them also for guidance.  Nonetheless, the 
SEP numbers are, of course, a collection and summary of individual projections, whereas, 
arguably, the statement is a stronger reflection of the consensus of the Committee. 
So it’s difficult to say exactly in which direction market participants would interpret this.  
Just removing the accommodative language could be interpreted ambiguously.  It could either 
be, this is a signal that the Committee is close to the end of the tightening cycle, or it could be a 
signal that there is a willingness to basically go into restrictive territory.  So it’s not obvious 
exactly how market participants would react to that. 
MR. POTTER.  But the other big difference is, there’s a press conference.  That’s a big— 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  That’s what I was trying to say:  If we take out some 
language but the SEP still shows, say, essentially the same rate path, and there’s a press 
conference, which can explain what this is, that seems to be maybe a more favorable 
environment for making this kind of change than in 2005.  And even in 2005, there wasn’t much 
market reaction. 
MR. POTTER.   That’s right. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  I had the opposite reaction to the SEP—if we remove the 
accommodative language before we get to what we estimate the neutral rate is, which we’re now 
interpreting to be 2.9 percent, how does the public interpret that we’re removing accommodative 
language if we do it with an interest rate that’s lower than what we say we think the equilibrium 
rate’s going to be in the longer run?  Doesn’t that complicate the communication?  Because we 
have a median forecast in the SEP that defines “accommodative” as below 2.9 percent.  So if we 
pick a time other than that, do you see a communication challenge?  And, yes, we have other 
July 31–August 1, 2018
141 of 219


 
 
 
ways to deal with it, but I think that the SEP will be a complicating factor.  So I think the 
language doesn’t stand by itself.  I don’t know how you would think about that. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I don’t know whether this would be weaseling out of the problem, but 
I think many of you are on the record emphasizing uncertainty around neutral rate estimates.  As 
I pointed out, that was also part of the 2005 discussion—some participant said that they thought 
that the uncertainty was so high that it was just, at this point, not wise to take a strong stand on 
whether monetary policy was still accommodative or not.  So even though you have the point 
estimates out in the public, my guess is that most observers are very much aware that these 
individual estimates are surrounded by very large ranges of uncertainty. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  I mean, that’s our best point estimate, presumably.  So if we 
remove the language before the funds rate reaches our best point estimate, we can say there’s a 
large standard error around this estimate.  I still think it seems a little incongruous. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I could now take a somewhat literalist approach and point out that in 
2005, actually, the statement was a little more guarded in how it described the stance.  Namely, it 
said that “the Committee believes that . . . the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative,” whereas today your statement states it as a fact:  “The stance of monetary 
policy remains accommodative.”  No beliefs and no judgment.  [Laughter]  It is stated as a fact. 
So I don’t know whether that would help in that context, but I think it would be a 
defensible position to say, “We think that at this point, it’s prudent to no longer pronounce on 
exactly whether the stance of monetary policy is accommodative or restrictive, because the range 
of uncertainty is just pretty large.” 
MR. POTTER.  Thomas, the other point is, the r* that you’re producing comes along in 
2023 and 2024.  And the current estimates are the short-run r*—I don’t want to get into all of the 
July 31–August 1, 2018
142 of 219


 
 
 
different versions, but the short-run r* could be lower than that.  If you look at the surveys that 
we do, they haven’t moved up, but they are lower than the implicit 0.9 that you have in the SEP. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  I don’t think what you just said is a straightforward communication 
to the public, to be honest. 
MR. POTTER.  That’s why you have the press conference. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Well, I do think it’s very important for us to make clear in our 
communications that that long-run federal funds rate is not equivalent to the shorter-run or 
medium-run r*.  I mean, we always get a medium-run r* estimate in the monetary policy 
discussion in the Tealbook.  I think we distinguish in our own thinking. 
What I would hate to see is an effort for the Committee to agree at any point in time, do 
we have a consensus view about what short-run r* is?  I mean, this would put a lot of burden on 
precision in this Committee to keep estimating where we are relative to a concept that we may 
not agree on precisely where that is.  I will argue tomorrow that I think it’s better to get rid of it 
sooner rather than later so that we don’t have to be precise about whether we have an agreement 
about an unobserved variable in the short run. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  By the way, I think you can explain this ahead of time and let 
people get used to the idea, which would certainly help.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  I just think it might be useful.  It feels to me there’s where we are today, 
there’s “we’re getting close,” and then we’re going to stop talking about it.  And it’s probably 
worth getting the language together for the three of them as a package.  Maybe it’s the “for now” 
language.  Maybe it’s the “further gradual increases may still be warranted.”  But it would be 
July 31–August 1, 2018
143 of 219


 
 
 
very helpful, I think, as we get closer to this to see all three of them and how we’re going to lay it 
out. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I’m afraid that “see all three of them” would— 
MR. BARKIN.  We have language right now? 
MR. LAUBACH.  Yes. 
MR. BARKIN.  Oh.  You’re suggesting there’s transition language, which is whatever 
version of “we’re getting close,” and then there’s the language that we use when we actually 
think we’re at whatever the number is. 
MR. HARKER.  Or just drop it altogether. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Yes. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Is that what you’re suggesting? 
MR. BARKIN.  I thought the 2005 suggestion felt very much like transition language 
to me. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Okay, I think I should clarify.  My briefing approach was premised on 
the notion that there’s one decision on when you want to remove the “remains accommodative” 
language, but then there is the other issue that you already have currently in the statement, which 
is that it talks about further gradual increases.  That provides some guidance. 
In 2005, the Committee essentially started providing that guidance at the time when it 
took out “remains accommodative,” because then it was talking about some further measured 
policy firming.  At some point, you will also have to revisit the “further gradual increases” 
because, well, “increases” means at least two [laughter].  So at some point, you’ll have to 
consider when you want to be less firm on that point. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Bullard. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
144 of 219


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you, Thomas.  I think this is a 
good analysis.  I just wanted to look at this “Recession Probability Based on Real Rate Gap” 
picture here, in the bottom-left part of the exhibit. 
I think the 1990s are a very instructive period for the Committee today, and 1995 was a 
point at which the Committee had normalized rates quite a bit following the early ’90s recession.  
There was a recession scare, actually, in the first half of 1995, and the Committee stopped raising 
rates and went to a policy of reacting to incoming events. 
So if you look at this real rate gap measure, as you say, it doesn’t really tell us very much 
about when the recession was going to come, so there are a lot of false positives.  But what does 
actually send a good signal is the yield curve during this period, the second half of the ’90s, 
when the yield curve remained positive through most of this period.  The spread between the 
10-year and the 2-year rates was between 50 and 100 basis points, fluctuating around.  The 
Committee moved the policy rate up and down at various junctures.  One juncture was the Asian 
currency crisis.  Eventually, the yield curve did invert, and then we got a recession.  Now, you 
could say, well, that was just late in the business cycle or something like that.  But this went on 
for five years, and it was a booming economy for five years.  And it’s just implausible to me that 
the recessionary shock just happened to show up at the moment that the yield curve inverted. 
So this is why I think that there’s more to the yield curve inversion story—the signal that 
the market is sending us and the mismatch between market-based expectations and what the 
Committee thinks—than just the idea that we’re somehow late in the cycle and, therefore, more 
susceptible to shocks.  So that’s my take on this. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Further comments?  [No response]  All right.  We will adjourn, 
and we’ll meet in the elegant West Court Café [laughter], as usual, at five o’clock, at which time 
July 31–August 1, 2018
145 of 219


 
 
 
it’ll be ready.  And thanks, everybody.  Look forward to picking this up at nine o’clock 
tomorrow morning. 
[Meeting recessed] 
 
 
 
July 31–August 1, 2018
146 of 219


 
 
 
August 1 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  We’re going to start off now—one 
minute early, I have to say—with our monetary policy go-round.  And we’re going to start with 
Vice Chairman Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as 
written, something I sense I’ll be saying a lot. 
After Friday’s real GDP release, the economy appears to be performing even better than 
we’d been expecting at our previous meeting.  The near-term outlook is favorable, and risks are 
balanced.  We’re as close to achieving our dual-mandate goals as likely we’ll ever be.  This 
argues for staying on the path of gradual removal of accommodation that we’ve been on these 
past few years.  Barring any dramatic change in the outlook, I fully expect that a rate increase 
will be appropriate at our next meeting.  And, again, assuming the economy performs about as 
expected, I anticipate that another rate hike will be appropriate in December. 
In this case, we enter next year with a target funds rate that is nearing the range of 
estimates of the longer-run neutral rate, and this is entirely appropriate in the context of an 
economy with a 4 percent unemployment rate and inflation at our 2 percent goal.  And the 
prospect of closing in on the neutral rate stance late this year means that we will need to revisit in 
coming months our statement language that says “the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative.”  We had an early preview of that discussion yesterday afternoon, and I found 
that helpful, but I also found the discussion in the box about removing the language in 2005 
instructive. 
When I think about this issue of this language, I look ahead to where we will be at some 
point in the future and try to work backward from there.  And when I look ahead in that way, I 
July 31–August 1, 2018
147 of 219


 
 
 
honestly cannot imagine a situation in which we would want to replace this language with a 
formulation that says that policy is restrictive.  Therefore, the plausible end game is one in which 
the accommodation sentence is just removed.  So then the question that comes up, which we 
started discussing yesterday and we discussed back in May, is how best to transition to this 
desirable end point. 
One possible solution is to move in small steps, perhaps by adding the modifier 
“somewhat” before “accommodative.”  I don’t see this as particularly advantageous for several 
reasons.  First, such a change would seem to overly stress the precise value of the neutral rate as 
a guide for our policy decisions.  As we’ve discussed many times, there’s a great deal of 
uncertainty about the level of the neutral rate, making it nearly impossible to speak with any 
confidence about the relative stance of policy once the funds rate starts to near 2 percent. 
Second, I don’t think we have a clear consensus here on the Committee on what is meant 
exactly by the expression “accommodative policy stance” at this juncture.  For example, are we 
talking about short-run r* or the long-run r* that shows up in our SEP?  Do we include the 
effects of the balance sheet when we think about a policy being accommodative?  Do we include 
the fiscal stimulus in thinking about policy being accommodative?  These are all differences of 
views or opinion about what this word means, but the fact that there isn’t a strong, clear 
consensus—I think that makes this phrase problematic for communicating our policy intentions 
in the future. 
Third, I see the neutral rate as only one of the many factors in our policy decisions over 
the next few years.  Honestly, we will be more focused on what’s happening with inflation and 
unemployment, implying that we should not overemphasize the relevance of the neutral rate as 
we go forward. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
148 of 219


 
 
 
Finally, I’m not too concerned about a market reaction to deleting the sentence in one go.  
After all, we made several substantive changes in the statement in our previous meeting, and that 
generated very little market attention. 
So, based on these considerations, I conclude that the best approach is to remove this 
sentence in one go—pull the bandage off, if you will.  And in terms of timing, my concern is that 
the longer that we keep this sentence in the statement, the more the public will wonder and ask, 
what does it mean, what is to be inferred from this, and what implications does it have for our 
policy in the period ahead?  Indeed, there’s already a lot of speculation in the market that once 
we remove this “accommodative” language, that means that we’ve completed the tightening 
cycle and perhaps we’ll take a pause.  So I think that the longer this sentence is in there, the more 
problematic it is for our communication of our policy strategy and our policy outlook.  And, 
again, I think that argues for not only deleting the sentence in its entirety, but also doing that 
relatively soon.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support today’s decision as written in 
alternative B.  I think we’re in good shape for today, but I also think that the general strategy laid 
out by the Committee is coming under increasing pressure, as the market does not see as much 
inflation risk over the forecast horizon as the Committee does.  In my view, the burden will be on 
the Committee to be able, credibly, to cite inflation risks for the period ahead. 
With the Phillips curve as flat as it is, it will be difficult to uncover enough rocks to find 
these risks.  The alternative scenarios section of the Tealbook found no scenarios under which 
inflation meaningfully exceeded the inflation target.  This means that even relatively large 
July 31–August 1, 2018
149 of 219


 
 
 
shocks that are adverse from an inflation perspective can easily be handled by the Committee.  
This suggests to me that there’s no need to be preemptive in the current situation. 
Why is this happening?  A good way, in my view, to think about the Committee actions 
during 2017 and 2018 is that we have already been preemptive with respect to potential inflation 
threats.  We have already raised the policy rate substantially, on the order of 175 basis points, 
while inflation was still below target.  We began to normalize the balance sheet during this same 
period.  These preemptive actions have snuffed out inflation risks over the forecast horizon.  The 
risk now is that taking even more action against incipient inflation at the September meeting and 
beyond may be overkill and may increase the risks of an end to the expansion.  This is the 
message that the market is sending through ongoing yield curve developments. 
I think the market view is about right.  Growth in the economy is likely to slow over the 
forecast horizon.  Market-based inflation expectations are muted.  Global yields are low and 
unlikely to move higher.  This constellation of data suggests that we are at a neutral level of rates 
today, putting neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation. 
The September meeting is shaping up to be an important one, because the Committee 
seems prepared to move at that juncture and will likely send a signal that a further December 
increase is essentially locked in through the SEP.  Accordingly, the September move will be 
priced in as 50 basis points instead of 25, with an option to do more.  Indeed, markets already put 
a high probability on two further moves in the second half of 2018. 
Our problem is that, in the current environment, it will be quite difficult to get off this 
train.  What is the stopping rule for this Committee?  How much more inflation risk has to be 
squeezed out of the system?  Haven’t we already done this?  And what about the risk of pushing 
too hard and ending the expansion prematurely? 
July 31–August 1, 2018
150 of 219


 
 
 
On the yield curve question, many are arguing, both inside and outside the Committee, 
that this time is different.  But this argument has been made before.  Prudent policy would 
respect the signal being sent by markets and adjust our approach to policy accordingly.  As I 
noted yesterday, there are simple and compelling alternatives in the Tealbook, including 
adopting an asymmetric loss function, under which one does not worry about forcing 
unemployment up toward a preconceived notion of the natural rate of unemployment.  If we 
remain with our current ideas that unemployment has to rise before we can claim to be at neutral, 
I do not see a natural stopping rule for the Committee until a recession occurs.  Unemployment is 
unlikely to rise into the 4.5 to 4.8 percent range slowly, according to historical experience.  
Instead, we may keep raising rates until a recession occurs, at which time unemployment will 
increase very substantially, on the order of several hundred basis points. 
Adopting an asymmetric loss function would get us out of this trap.  What we should do 
is monitor inflation more directly instead of indirectly through unemployment or real GDP 
developments.  A good start on this would be to monitor market-based inflation expectations 
directly, for instance, and not worry as much about the state of labor markets or the state of 
economic growth.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B.  Not surprisingly, 
the market currently anticipates a very low probability of tightening for this non–press 
conference meeting but a very high probability for a tightening in September.  This is quite 
consistent with a continued gradual increase in interest rates.  With inflation at target and labor 
markets tightening well beyond my estimate of full employment, I believe that we should 
continue to tighten gradually, and that we will need to continue gradually tightening for some 
July 31–August 1, 2018
151 of 219


 
 
 
time.  The lack of immediate inflation pressures, in a situation of an apparently flat Phillips 
curve, gives us the flexibility to move more gradually than we have in the past, when inflation 
concerns became acute more quickly. 
While gradual increases still remain appropriate, we are running the risk that the 
unemployment rate falls to around 3½ percent, as much of the Committee expected in the most 
recent SEP.  Inflation pressures and financial stability might be subject to more-nonlinear 
dynamics.  More rapid increases in inflation or more quickly unraveling financial stability would 
make it more difficult for us to move only gradually. 
Previous periods in which the economy fell substantially bel.ow estimates of the natural 
unemployment rate for a year or more have been very good indicators of subsequent recessions, 
maybe even better than an inverted yield curve.  In our current SEP—which is, of course, based 
on appropriate policy—we assume that we can fall well below the natural unemployment rate for 
an extended period without causing imbalances that ultimately lead to a recession.  This time 
may be different, but I am skeptical, and I believe that there is substantial risk that allowing the 
economy to fall much further below our estimate of full employment will increase significantly 
the risk of a recession.  And should we have a recession, we also run the risk of a deeper-than-
normal recession for reasons discussed yesterday.  That is, I am concerned that both monetary 
policy and fiscal policy are sufficiently constrained that they will not have the ability to stabilize 
the downturn as effectively as we have historically. 
Just a couple of comments following up on the discussion yesterday.  Actually, 
unfortunately, I think it would have been good to have that discussion go on a little bit longer 
than it actually did, because I think it is important to think about the timing of removing the word 
“accommodative.”  Good communication ideally would have the SEP, the press conference, and 
July 31–August 1, 2018
152 of 219


 
 
 
the statement all well aligned with one another.  Removing language as soon as September will 
force us to explain why we are not accommodative any longer when our forecast has GDP 
growth above potential, unemployment falling, and inflation gradually rising over the next two 
years.  I would view a January removal of the “accommodative” language as more appropriate. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the policy action in alternative B 
and have no comment on the proposed statement language. 
As I said in the economy round, we had a strong second quarter.  But I’ve also heard a lot 
from business contacts about uncertainty, especially related to trade policy, that makes them 
hesitant to make big bets on this run rate being sustained.  Thus, this is a good juncture at which 
to pause, observe, and evaluate.  Overall, the recent data have not caused material change in my 
outlook, and I still feel comfortable with a total of three 25 basis point moves this calendar year. 
I will be keeping an eye on tariffs and the ability of firms to pass on these extra costs into 
final prices.  As I noted yesterday, how the Committee communicates about such inflationary 
pressures could influence the public’s inflation expectations as well as expectations about the 
future stance of monetary policy.  I hope we will have some more clarity about tariff policy and 
possible responses by the September meeting. 
I will also continue to look for signs of increasing price pressures coming from the labor 
market.  Like others, I have been getting regular reports of businesses having trouble finding 
workers, but most still tell me they are not increasing wages in response.  More say they are 
doing that today than six months ago, and if this trend continues and strengthens, I will support a 
steeper federal funds path in coming months. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
153 of 219


 
 
 
Finally, I very much appreciated yesterday’s discussion.  Like President Rosengren, I 
thought it was a good discussion about what our communications strategy should be as we get 
closer to a neutral policy stance.  How we shape the public’s and the market’s understanding of 
our policy pivot is important, and, as I’ve said here before, many are looking to the Federal 
Reserve for stability and certainty.  Especially in these times, we must take care not to undermine 
that confidence. 
So in this context and in the context of the discussion that’s gone before, I believe it’s 
appropriate to remove the “accommodative” language at some point before the end of this year.  
I’m open to discussions about exact timing, and I think that will be an important decision point 
for all of us.  In terms of articulating what the removal means, I might suggest that we view this 
as another step in the normalization process—that it makes no judgment about whether we think 
we have stopped being accommodative completely, but rather we’re returning to an approach in 
which we let the market make judgments and view the market and the economy on their own.  
And I would say that we should also remind everyone that we are increasing transparency 
through the press conference process, and that would provide opportunities to gain more clarity 
as we move forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Acting President Gould. 
MR. GOULD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  Recent 
data confirm that the economic expansion continues at a robust pace and that we’ve effectively 
reached our inflation target.  Most labor market indicators suggest we’ve already exceeded full 
employment.  With the economy firing on all cylinders, inflation looks likely to move modestly 
above 2 percent over the next year or two. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
154 of 219


 
 
 
Under these very favorable economic conditions, the language in alternative B is 
appropriately consistent with a gradual path of policy normalization.  It conveys the message that 
there’s been little substantive change in the outlook and that we remain on track to have 
additional policy rate increases. 
Looking ahead, I am in favor of gradually raising the funds rate, at least until we’re sure 
that the stance of monetary policy is no longer accommodative.  Continuing our return to neutral 
is the clear next step.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  Based on my 
forecast, I believe we should be gradually removing accommodation and moving toward a 
neutral monetary policy stance.  For me, that’s somewhere in the range of 2½ to 2¾ percent.   
On the basis of that, I would think that September, for me, feels a little bit too soon to 
drop the “accommodative” language, and I think it would be easier to explain to the public if we 
did that in either December or January.  My fear would be, once we drop that phrase, we may 
give the impression that moves after dropping that phrase are “restrictive.”  But I’m open minded 
to arguments on both sides of this, number one. 
Number two, once we get to neutral, whether that’s the first quarter or first half of next 
year, I am not yet convinced that we should be moving to a restrictive stance, but I don’t need to 
make that judgment yet.  I’d prefer to make that judgment at that time.  The reasons for my 
caution are:  first, the structural drivers we talked about—aging, sluggish productivity, and the 
fiscal problems that we face in the outyears; second, the consideration that our tools are 
asymmetrical.  For me, almost the biggest conclusion I took from the forward-guidance and 
alternative policy discussion yesterday—it was a reminder to me that it’s much easier for us to 
July 31–August 1, 2018
155 of 219


 
 
 
tighten than to ease.  And in the next downturn, we won’t have fiscal policy, and we’re going to 
have to be very creative from a monetary policy point of view.  But, again, it emphasizes to me 
our tools are asymmetrical, which, for me, suggests we should be cautious as we remove 
accommodation. 
I’m also aware that monetary policy acts with a lag.  I think this is particularly tricky for 
us because we’ve got this sizable fiscal stimulus that we believe will fade, and I think, as we 
move into next year, the outlook may look different as this fiscal stimulus does fade.  So I want 
to give us a chance to assess what we’ve done once we get to neutral and also give us a chance to 
see more clearly as fiscal policy effects begin to fade sometime next year. 
Regarding the yield curve, one last comment.  We will, I am sure, continue having the 
debate on inversion, and this is a debate in which there is no answer.  It will continue, and I think 
that’s appropriate.  For me, the part that I do have conviction about is, the yield curve is saying to 
me at least that we are late cycle—not the end of the cycle, but late cycle.  It also says to me that 
the market expects growth to moderate in 2019 and certainly in 2020.  It obviously says 
something about the global search for safe assets. 
For me, I am not so concerned if the yield curve inverts while we’re accommodative.  I 
would be much more worried, though, about an inverted yield curve if we were actually adopting 
a restrictive stance.  So, again, I think that will cause me to be more cautious, certainly as we get 
to a more neutral stance sometime late next year or early in 2019.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  As I 
mentioned yesterday, we’re in a bit of a sweet spot in the economy, and I am more confident that 
the return of inflation to target is not a transitory fact or phenomenon and, therefore, lean toward 
July 31–August 1, 2018
156 of 219


 
 
 
a likely rate hike in September.  And I believe an additional rate hike in December may likely be 
appropriate.  But, as always, the data will be the final arbiter of appropriate policy. 
On language, in terms of whether we drop the sentence or modify the sentence, I think 
September is probably, for my taste, a little too early.  But there is an alternative between 
September and December that we might want to consider that we could put on the table.  And we 
have a couple of options, I think.  One is to drop it, I mean, as Vice Chairman Williams talked 
about.  The other is to modify the language—to use a technical phrase, fuzz it up a little bit.  So 
one possible alternative is to say something like “The stance of monetary policy continues to 
support strong labor market conditions and the achievement of our 2 percent symmetric inflation 
target.” 
I worry a little bit about just dropping it—how the markets will react.  We could say a 
sentence like that.  I’m not saying exactly that sentence, but a sentence like that would give us 
some room to move, because I don’t like the directional components of this—that is, it’s 
accommodative, or it’s restrictive.  I think we need, clearly, to remove that.  But we could 
continue to say that we believe that policy is appropriate.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the time comes thousands of years 
from now, when all that is left of our civilization are the transcripts of the FOMC meetings 
[laughter], archaeologists will write learned tomes explaining that while it is difficult to say 
exactly what they were intending to accomplish, there was apparently one talismanic phrase that, 
when the priests gathered with the passage of the seasons in the temple, needed to be repeated 
verbatim before each priest began his final ululating chant:  “I support alternative B as written.”  
[Laughter] 
July 31–August 1, 2018
157 of 219


 
 
 
Holding the policy rate unchanged at this meeting is consistent with the gradual pace of 
tightening that I feel is appropriate.  Inflation is at target, with few signs of overheating.  We can 
be patient but steady in our withdrawal of accommodation. 
On the question of the evolution of the phrase “remains accommodative,” I thought the 
Tealbook box and Thomas’s discussion yesterday were quite enlightening.  It’s heartening to 
confirm that markets were able to adjust to such a momentous change in the statement language 
without the earth being hit by an asteroid.  That was likely helped by an intensifying discussion 
within the Committee that showed through to the minutes.  Because I have a relatively high 
estimate of the neutral rate of interest, with all of the caveats that Vice Chairman Williams would 
attach to that, and a policy rate that is mildly more gradual than the SEP median, I’m in 
somewhat less of a hurry to begin this conversation, but not tightly wrapped around the axle on 
timing. 
I thought that the staff memo on recent developments in the federal funds market was 
interesting.  It’s encouraging that markets reacted as we expected to our adjustment of the IOR 
relative to the top of the target range.  That said, the narrowing of the spread between the 
effective federal funds rate and the IOR appears to be more persistent than we might once have 
anticipated.  So the question is, is this narrowing telling us anything about the demand for 
reserve balances? 
Now, from the memo and many discussions, I take it that the staff would be cautious in 
interpreting price moves this way.  The quantity of excess reserves is still very large by historical 
standards.  It seems unlikely that scarcity would be putting upward pressure on prices, but can 
we be sure?  There’s a lot we don’t know about the demand for reserves, and we have admitted 
as much in our policy normalization addendum.  I think the sentence was—in fact, I know it 
July 31–August 1, 2018
158 of 219


 
 
 
because I have it written down here—“The Committee expects to learn more about the 
underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization.”  I think we 
should be open to doing so. 
One key area of uncertainty is the interaction of the post-crisis regime of bank liquidity 
regulation and reserve demand.  It’s not only that we’re uncertain over the response of 
systemwide demand to the new regulatory framework, but this uncertainty is compounded by 
evidence that, in this new world, banks do not seem to have uniform preferences for the 
composition of their HQLA between reserves and other assets.  Now, there could be a variety of 
reasons for that, including that the banks simply don’t know yet what they’re doing.  It could be 
that, just as we are attempting to learn about banks’ preferences regarding reserves, the banks 
themselves are learning about their own preferences, raising the potential for volatility and 
unexpected shifts in demand. 
So where does that leave us?  In discussions regarding the long-run framework, the staff 
has presented a helpful graph that includes a demand curve for reserves that’s kinked between a 
steep portion, in which reserves are scarce, and a flat portion, in which reserves are abundant.  
Although this is a useful illustrative device, I do think we have to be prepared for a reality in 
whoch the underlying demand for reserves is fluid, is volatile, and evolves over time—which is 
to say that we should be prepared for the possibility that running down the balance sheet might 
not be quite as boring as watching paint dry.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Economic 
fundamentals continue to be strong, and inflation is showing signs of remaining near 2 percent.  I 
think it’s appropriate for monetary policy to continue to move gradually to a more neutral 
July 31–August 1, 2018
159 of 219


 
 
 
setting.  Alternative B indicates this approach is still appropriate.  And the dot chart in the SEPs 
also provides helpful additional information about FOMC participants’ views about future 
appropriate monetary policy, plus you have your press conference to explain this. 
Should we take out the phrase about accommodative monetary policy?  Yes, we should 
do that at some point.  Should we say at some point that monetary policy moves to a restrictive 
stance?  Probably not.  I don’t remember if we’ve ever done that before.  Should we say that the 
policy will be supporting continued real GDP growth and inflation near 2 percent, along the lines 
of what President Harker mentioned?  That sounds like that could be workable.  I support the 
evolution of that phrasing, and I support alternative B.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  On the basis of my outlook and assessment of 
risk, I believe it’s appropriate for the FOMC to continue on its path of gradually raising the 
federal funds rate.  Inflation is rising and is near 2 percent, and labor markets continue to tighten 
beyond sustainable levels of employment.  In my view, the risks to the outlook are balanced.  It’s 
important that we calibrate monetary policy to the strong economy in order to sustain the 
expansion.  Yet the current real federal funds rate is negative, and it’s below the range of 
estimates of the neutral rate. 
The lessons of earlier expansions both here and abroad indicate that it’s difficult to 
engineer soft landings.  As history shows, the costs of running an overheated economy for too 
long can be high if things go badly. 
Now, over this expansion, the association between labor market tightness and inflation 
has been weak.  While this has been a factor in the economy’s undershooting 2 percent inflation 
over much of the expansion, it has provided a benefit in allowing us to follow a strategy of 
July 31–August 1, 2018
160 of 219


 
 
 
gradually removing accommodation rather than having to move rates up more steeply.  As the 
expansion has continued, we’ve been able to move the funds rate up at a considerably more 
gradual pace compared with past cycles.  But a gradual pace doesn’t mean no changes in 
monetary policy in the midst of an economy that continues to strengthen. 
There are uncertainties.  But it seems risky allowing things to continue too far beyond 
what the best available evidence suggests is maximum employment and inflation at our 2 percent 
goal.  An aggressive response is not called for.  But as we move further beyond estimates of 
steady state, imbalances can show up in financial markets and the macroeconomy.  We need to 
calibrate monetary policy to lower these risks. 
Now, we haven’t prepared the public for a move today, and gradual increases don’t mean 
rate increases each meeting.  So I accept alternative B and the associated statement language.  
But if the economy continues to perform as anticipated, I will support increasing the funds rate at 
our next meeting, with further increases later this year and next year.  And I’ll support statement 
language indicating that gradual increases in the funds rate are warranted to sustain the 
expansion. 
In my view, continuing the gradual removal of accommodation in the midst of a strong 
economy seems like a very good “investment in our future,” and we should take steps to solidify 
this message with the public.  Of course, if there’s a material change in the outlook, monetary 
policy will need to respond appropriately. 
Regarding the language in paragraph 3 on the Committee’s assessment of the stance of 
policy, which Thomas Laubach discussed yesterday, I would imagine that market participants 
and the broader public are interested in that mainly because they use it to glean something about 
the Committee’s views on the expected future path of the policy rate.  So long as we retain the 
July 31–August 1, 2018
161 of 219


 
 
 
language in paragraph 2 that the Committee anticipates further increases are likely to be 
warranted to sustain the expansion, then deleting the language on the stance of policy would 
seem to me less likely to change the public’s policy expectations.  That’s one benefit of 
removing the language on stance sooner rather than later, while further rate increases continue to 
characterize the Committee’s consensus view. 
Another reason to remove it sooner rather than later is that, at some point, monetary 
policy may need to move beyond neutral in order to promote our dual-mandate goals, as 
suggested in the median policy rate path in the June SEP.  Does the Committee want to be 
burdened with having to characterize its policy stance as restrictive?  So here I agree with Vice 
Chair Williams that the answer is no. 
Also, there are a wide range of estimates of the short-run neutral rate, which varies with 
the state of the economy and about which there are likely to be varying views around the table.  I 
could imagine it might be easier to reach consensus on a policy rate decision than on a 
characterization of the stance of policy relative to neutral.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Leaving the funds 
rate unchanged is consistent with the Committee’s current strategy for gradually removing 
accommodation.  With labor markets tight and inflation at the Committee’s longer-run target, I 
see our policy choices growing more difficult over the forecast horizon.  Judging the stance of 
monetary policy relative to an expected lower equilibrium rate will be clouded by fiscal stimulus, 
a large balance sheet and its lingering effects, and the uncertainties associated with trade policy 
actions. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
162 of 219


 
 
 
Under the current outlook, I anticipate that it will be appropriate to next adjust the stance 
of policy at the September meeting.  And although appropriate policy, in my view, calls for 
further increases in the funds rate to bring policy closer to neutral and to keep unemployment and 
inflation near their current levels, the flow of data will shape my view on how many and when 
we should proceed with future rate increases. 
Along these lines, I continue to support adjusting the forward guidance in our statement, 
including the eventual removal of the word “accommodative,” in order to express greater data 
dependence and less certainty regarding the future rate path.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I may be an 
outlier in that I would support dropping the phrase “monetary policy remains accommodative” 
today.  I’m not actually putting it on the table.  I don’t expect that to happen, but I’d be 
supportive of it today.  And I’ll talk a little bit more about that in a moment. 
I continue to focus on three key indicators to gauge the appropriate policy stance.  One is 
core inflation, the second is inflation expectations, and the third is assessments of labor market 
slack.  Core PCE inflation is essentially at our target, and I think we’ve made real progress there.  
Inflation expectations are stable, but, I still think, somewhat low by historical standards.  And 
slack remains uncertain.  As I said yesterday, the economy continues to create 200,000 jobs a 
month, with fairly modest nominal wage growth.  That suggests to me that slack still remains.  
So I think some monetary policy accommodation is still appropriate.  But then moving to neutral, 
I think, is going to be important.  
Now, when archaeologists thousands of years from now read our transcripts, I think 
they’re going to be most shocked by John Williams saying that r* is not that important.  
July 31–August 1, 2018
163 of 219


 
 
 
[Laughter]  I think r* is quite important, John, and assessing where we are relative to neutral is 
really where I’m focused.  You know, the staff in the Tealbook says that the neutral rate is 
0.5 percent.  As all of us know, there’s huge uncertainty associated with the models that create 
these numbers.  So, what do we do?  How do we make decisions in light of this uncertainty? 
One option is, everybody has their own favorite model that we anchor ourselves to.  A 
second is that we take the average or median of a bunch of models.  I’m not sure that that’s any 
more intellectually rigorous.  Third, I’m looking at the yield curve as giving us feedback as to 
where the market thinks neutral is.  I can’t tell you that there’s an exact science behind it, but it’s 
as good as any of these other methods that I just described.  So, to me, I think the markets are 
signaling—I think we’ve probably got one more hike before we flatten the yield curve, at least 
the spread between the 2-year and the 10-year rates that I’m focused on.  And that suggests to me 
that the market thinks the neutral rate is somewhat lower than what the staff thinks in the 
Tealbook.  Maybe the neutral rate is 0.25 real instead of 0.5.  So, to me, I don’t see any evidence 
right now that we should be moving to a contractionary policy stance. 
I think I heard people around the table say that, at some point, we want to drop the word 
“accommodative,” but we don’t want to put in the word “restrictive.”  So we want restrictive 
policy—we just don’t want to call it what it is.  I think we should own it.  If we’re going to move 
to a restrictive stance, we should just wear it and say we’re moving to a restrictive stance.  I 
understand why that’s not going to be a very pleasant thing to do, but I think we should own our 
policy position. 
Now, I could probably support a hike in September because I think that’ll probably get us 
to around neutral.  What would I take to support further hikes beyond September, beyond 
neutral?  One is if the long end of the curve starts to climb.  And what would cause that?  
July 31–August 1, 2018
164 of 219


 
 
 
Inflation expectations climbing or real economic growth prospects climbing—it would show up 
in the long end of the curve.  Then we would not, in fact, invert the yield curve.  And I think that 
that would support further rate hikes. 
If the long end of the curve does not climb, what would it take for me to support more 
rate hikes?  It would have to be a bout of much higher near-term inflation.  Me, I’m thinking core 
inflation of 2.5 percent or above and some confidence that it continues to climb.  And why would 
we raise rates then?  I think we would raise rates then to make sure that inflation expectations 
remain anchored.  But if the long end of the curve stays pegged at around a 3 percent rate, near-
term inflation is 2.2 or 2.3 percent, and there are no signs that inflation expectations are 
unanchoring, I’m not sure why we would move to a restrictive policy stance.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin.   
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  The economy’s performance 
continues to merit our persistence on the gradual path we’ve outlined. 
On the memo, I agree we need to carefully plan the messaging as we approach neutral.  
We could choose to just remove the “accommodative” sentence, but I worry that if we do, we 
might inadvertently send a message that we are now knowingly restrictive, because we’ll still 
have the sentence that says further gradual increases are coming.  As several others have said, I 
believe there’ll be at that time enough diversity of opinion in this room that we might want 
language that reflects those differences, as opposed to trying to characterize it specifically. 
My instinct is that the end of the year would be a good time for us to do that, depending 
on how the economy evolves.  It would be a timely moment to look forward and set expectations 
for the next year or so in coordination with our SEP forecast.  At that time, we might well be 
July 31–August 1, 2018
165 of 219


 
 
 
50 basis points higher, with the real rate gap around zero.  And then we can use the press 
conference to send the right message about uncertainty regarding the outlook. 
On a separate topic, I was struck by how negative the outcome of the tariff war looked in 
the Tealbook alternative scenario, especially as opposed to all of the other alternative scenarios 
that weren’t anywhere near as negative.  As I do believe significant and persistent tariffs—and 
even a broader set of them—are a real possibility, we may want at some point to devote further 
attention to what appropriate policy would be in response to a tariff-induced recession that, in 
parallel, drives a spike in inflation.  That outcome is certainly not my baseline.  But I do think we 
ought to be prepared for it as a possibility. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  With strong momentum in underlying demand and fiscal 
stimulus in the pipeline, continued increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be appropriate 
to sustain full employment and inflation around 2 percent.  The economy is continuing to expand 
rapidly at a time when we are at or beyond most estimates of full employment.  Furthermore, we 
have yet to see the full effect of fiscal stimulus, which will likely keep the economy growing 
above trend well into next year. 
While some overshooting is welcome, in light of the need to reestablish the credibility of 
our 2 percent inflation objective, there could be risks, as President Rosengren noted.  For 
instance, if underlying trend inflation were to change unexpectedly—or unemployment rates that 
haven’t been observed in 50 years—or, as discussed yesterday, if financial vulnerabilities were 
to rise, we’ll need to strike a balance, and that may involve a somewhat steeper path than was 
readily apparent at the start of the year. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
166 of 219


 
 
 
On the other hand, if trade disruptions or foreign shocks were to materialize and spill 
over in a meaningful way into the domestic economy, we should be prepared to adjust in the 
other direction.  Presently, repercussions associated with possible future trade measures and their 
macroeconomic effects are too speculative and muted to call for any preemptive adjustment.  
Furthermore, the stimulus in the pipeline provides some insurance in the next two years against 
the economy being knocked off course by trade. 
In the period ahead, the Committee will be probing the appropriate path of the federal 
funds rate to sustain full employment and re-anchor inflation expectations without generating 
imbalances that could jeopardize growth.  Against that backdrop, I would recommend laying the 
groundwork today and in the minutes to eliminate the second sentence of paragraph 3, as 
suggested by Vice Chair Williams.  Although that sentence served an important purpose early in 
the normalization process, when the economy was far from full employment and target inflation, 
its utility is no longer clear, and the scope for confusion is likely to increase.  As we navigate 
forward, the appropriate benchmark for judging whether policy is accommodative could become 
increasingly subject to misinterpretation. 
Currently, each Committee member reports on our expected federal funds rate path along 
with our estimate of the long-run equilibrium federal funds rate.  As I noted yesterday, some 
Committee members may view the neutral rate of interest as elevated in the short and medium 
run relative to that benchmark due to temporary tailwinds, for instance, such as fiscal stimulus, 
that are projected to dissipate beyond the medium term.  I certainly do.  The neutral rate is an 
unobserved variable, and Committee members do not report our estimates of the neutral rate 
publicly.  Most estimates have wide confidence bands around them. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
167 of 219


 
 
 
The 2005 analogy presented by the staff yesterday suggests that we could seek to reach 
agreement among Committee members about the short-run neutral rate in order to remove the 
language just before the federal funds rate reaches that level.  I think this is needlessly 
complicated to pull off and communicate.  Instead, it would be simpler to signal, through the 
minutes, the language is no longer providing useful information and is likely to be deleted at a 
subsequent meeting.  Our communication should make clear that the elimination of that language 
would not reflect any Committee judgment that the federal funds rate has reached its neutral rate 
or what that level is. 
September may provide a particularly opportune moment to eliminate the language 
without eliciting market reaction, because Committee members will be providing additional 
information about the expected rate path through the addition of the 2021 projections, and the 
Chair will have the opportunity to both explain the language change and use the SEP to 
contextualize it in the press conference. 
In a coming meeting, I hope we will soon have a chance to discuss the balance sheet—the 
other important dimension of monetary policy.  As Lorie outlined yesterday and Governor 
Quarles highlighted, recent developments have raised the prospect that shrinking the balance 
sheet may not be as uneventful as President Harker’s colorful term “watching paint dry.”  The 
effective funds rate has been approaching IOER more quickly than we had anticipated.  That 
development may or may not have implications for the ultimate size of our balance sheet.  
However, it does suggest we should start to discuss a few things.  First, we should clarify sooner 
rather than later whether the policy framework will continue to operate a system of abundant 
reserves or instead return to the pre-crisis framework of scarce reserves. 
July 31–August 1, 2018
168 of 219


 
 
 
Second, assuming we retain the current framework with abundant reserves, before too 
long, we should consider what criteria we will use to decide when the balance sheet runoff 
process has run its course.  As the balance sheet shrinks and, along with it, reserves, it’s likely 
the effective funds rate will continue to rise relative to IOER.  That’s a straightforward 
implication of a downward-sloping demand curve.  In addition, if history is any guide, it’s likely 
that the demand curve will soon become steeper or will become steeper eventually.  In the pre-
crisis regime, with scarce reserves, the demand curve was very steep, whereas more recently, 
with ample reserves, it’s been quite flat. 
Along with a steepening demand curve, we’re likely to see the funds rate becoming more 
volatile as reserves shrink.  So that suggests a few criteria we might want to discuss to help 
assess when is the appropriate time to stop shrinking the balance sheet.  First, it seems desirable 
to retain a regime, at least to me, in which the high-frequency volatility of the funds rate is 
sufficiently low that frequent open market operations aren’t necessary.  So one reference point 
might be the intraday volatility of the funds rate in the pre-crisis framework.  If, for instance, 
high-frequency volatility were to revise much above those levels, starting to necessitate frequent 
open market operations, that would likely mean we had gone too far. 
Second, IOER should remain connected to the target range for the federal funds rate.  
When we began this normalization cycle, we set IOER at the top of the target range.  That was 
helpful for a number of reasons, including to anchor views about the funds rate.  We’ve recently 
adjusted it to be 5 basis points below the upper end, and it’s likely, as Lorie noted yesterday, that 
as the balance sheet normalization continues, the Committee will want to move IOER down 
further relative to the top of the target range.  Just as setting it at the top of the range helped 
July 31–August 1, 2018
169 of 219


 
 
 
anchor thinking about the funds rate initially, it might be helpful to anchor IOER no lower than 
the bottom of the range once the balance sheet is normalized. 
Since the balance sheet runoff is a novel policy for the Committee, we don’t know with 
any certainty how conditions in the federal funds market will evolve as the balance sheet and 
reserves shrink, and we will need to continue learning as we go.  Still, it would be helpful if we 
started discussing what our desired end state looks like to provide clarity to the markets and 
because it may have implications for our overall policy trajectory. 
I’ll look forward to discussing these issues in future meetings.  For today, I support 
alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks, everyone, for your comments.  Let’s 
talk first a little bit about the “accommodative” language, and I appreciate everyone’s comments 
on that.  This is something that’s not before us for a decision today, but I think it’s good to have 
had this discussion and the one last night.  First, it clearly is important that we communicate 
very, very carefully about the path, and it gets more important, as we come closer and closer to 
neutral, that we do so carefully.  And that comes down to sensible decisions that are well 
telegraphed and well explained.  But I think we can explain these things, and I’m very mindful 
that this is sort of the next important one on the horizon. 
I think that we could do this as soon as September.  I haven’t decided that that’s what I 
think we ought to do, but you can explain it.  In a way, I think you can think of it as, do you want 
to take this language out before the federal funds rate reaches the range of r* estimates of the 
Committee, or do you want to do it when you’re in that range?  If you do it before you’re in that 
range, as Governor Brainard was suggesting, you can characterize it as trying not to be in the 
business of picking a particular moment at which you’ve reached r*.  So you don’t want to be in 
July 31–August 1, 2018
170 of 219


 
 
 
that business, and you’re saying that it’s no longer a useful guidepost.  And the SEP is there, and 
2021 is there—there’s a lot to talk about at the September meeting.  So you could do it then.  I 
think you could also do it in December. 
I think if you wait until you’re in the range of participants’ estimates of the neutral rate, 
then you’re in the business of having to convince people that there isn’t some consensus that 
you’ve now reached neutral.  So, oddly enough, I think it gets harder to avoid that discussion the 
longer you wait. 
All of that said, I think—again, we’re not voting on this today—but I guess my thinking 
is, this is something that we ought to do later this year.  And, clearly, that’s a discussion we’ll be 
continuing. 
So, now to the things we are actually voting on today.  Clearly, there’s support around the 
table for keeping the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged and for alternative B as 
written.  Thank you for that.  And I’ll turn it over to Jim Clouse to talk about what we’re voting 
on and conduct the vote. 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The vote will be on the monetary policy 
statement as it appears on page 4 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials, and the vote will also 
encompass the directive to the Desk as it appears in the implementation note shown on pages 6 
and 7 of Thomas’s briefing materials. 
Chairman Powell  
 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Williams 
 
Yes 
President Barkin 
 
 
Yes 
President Bostic 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Brainard  
 
Yes 
President Mester 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Quarles  
 
Yes 
President George  
 
Yes 
 
July 31–August 1, 2018
171 of 219


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  Now we have two sets of related matters under the 
Board’s jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  I first need a 
motion from a Board member to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances 
unchanged at 1.95 percent. 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board 
member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing rate of 2.5 percent and 
establishment of the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified 
in the staff’s July 27 memo to the Board. 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  And our final agenda item is to 
confirm that the next meeting will be on Tuesday and Wednesday, September 25 and 26, 2018.  
That concludes this meeting.  For those of you who eat your lunch really early [laughter], 
wonderful boxed sandwiches are available next door.  I look forward to seeing all of you next 
September, if not before.  Thanks very much. 
END OF MEETING 
July 31–August 1, 2018
172 of 219
