SOURCE: FOMC20180926meeting.pdf
DATE: 20180926
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
September 25–26, 2018  
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held 
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on 
Tuesday, September 25, 2018, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, September 26, 2018, at 
9:00 a.m. 
PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Richard H. Clarida 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary C. Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor 
A. Reeve, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
September 25–26, 2018
1 of 153


 
 
 
Matthew J. Eichner,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, 
Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
 
Jennifer L. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of 
Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board 
Members, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Eric M. Engen, Joshua Gallin, and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate 
Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors  
 
Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson, and Joyce K. Zickler,2 Senior Advisers, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Jeffrey Huther, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Benjamin K. Johannsen, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 
 
 
1 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations. 
2 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only. 
3 Attended Tuesday session only. 
September 25–26, 2018
2 of 153


 
 
 
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors 
 
Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
 
Michael Dotsey and Geoffrey Tootell, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Boston, respectively 
 
Edward S. Knotek II, Spencer Krane, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively 
 
Jonathan P. McCarthy and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
New York and Kansas City, respectively 
 
William Dupor, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
 
Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
 
 
September 25–26, 2018
3 of 153


 
 
 
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 25–26, 2018 
 
September 25 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Let’s get started.  As usual, 
today’s meeting will be conducted as a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board, and I’ll need a 
motion from a Board member to close the meeting. 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection, so ordered.  We have an unusually large 
number of transitions to celebrate here today, so I’ll just jump right in. 
First, I’d like to welcome Rich Clarida, who, as all of you know, has been confirmed as 
Vice Chairman of the Board.  Rich brings with him an impressive resume that includes many 
contributions to the literature on macroeconomics and monetary policy, important roles at both 
the U.S. Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers, and also a great deal of practical 
experience on financial matters accumulated in his work in the financial sector.  Rich, I know I 
speak for everyone here in saying that we’re delighted to have you as a member of the Board and 
the FOMC, and we very much look forward to working with you.  [Applause] 
Next I’d like to congratulate Mary Daly on her appointment as the new president of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, effective October 1.  Mary’s had a long and 
distinguished career in the Federal Reserve System and is highly respected for her research on 
labor market dynamics and other topics as well as for her many other contributions, including her 
work as a champion of diversity.  Congratulations.  We all look forward to welcoming you to 
this table as a member of the Committee at our next meeting.  [Applause] 
September 25–26, 2018
4 of 153


 
 
 
The arrival of Mary at the table at the next meeting means that Mark Gould, who has 
been serving as acting president, can soon go back to doing just one very large job.  Thank you, 
Mark, for stepping into this role on top of your broad San Francisco and Federal Reserve System 
responsibilities and for representing the San Francisco Fed so ably at these past few FOMC 
meetings.  We’ll miss your thoughtful remarks at FOMC meetings, of course, but we look 
forward to the benefits to the Federal Reserve System that will continue to flow from your many 
talents and great leadership.  Thank you, Mark.  [Applause] 
Finally, I would like to acknowledge Joyce Zickler.  [Applause]  It’s hard to know where 
to begin, but Joyce will be retiring at the end of this month following a 43-year career on the 
Board’s staff—a period that spans seven Federal Reserve Chairs, beginning with Arthur Burns. 
Joyce joined the Division of Research and Statistics in September 1975, at a time when 
the Board was seeking to expand the analysis and forecasting of labor market and inflation 
developments.  She quickly became involved in projects for Chairman Burns.  I’m told that that 
could be something of a mixed blessing, in view of his reputation for fierce questioning, but 
Joyce emerged largely unscathed from that experience. 
Joyce has taken on a very broad range of duties over her distinguished career.  Among 
these, Joyce participated for a time in the Board’s annual evaluation of the Federal Reserve Bank 
research functions, a process that I’m sure brings back warm memories for our Reserve Bank 
colleagues.  In 2010, Joyce joined the Monetary Affairs Division, in which she has regularly 
participated in the drafting of the minutes of the FOMC meetings and the preparation of meeting 
transcripts.  This summer, Joyce has been working on the Board’s Oral History Project and has 
been invaluable in that effort, readily recalling events of 35 or 40 years ago as if they were just 
yesterday.  I wish we all had that talent. 
September 25–26, 2018
5 of 153


Throughout her career, Joyce has taken a special interest in training and mentoring many 
generations of the Board’s staff.  Joyce, you’ve been a wonderful colleague, and we’ll miss your 
drive and intelligence and completely unselfish devotion to the mission of the Federal Reserve.  
We wish you all the best in the years to come.  Thank you.  [Sustained applause] 
And now let’s turn to our formal agenda and to Simon for the Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As shown in the top-left panel of 
your first exhibit, moves in U.S. equity and rates markets continued trends seen over 
much of this year.  U.S. Treasury yields rose, the broad trade-weighted dollar 
appreciated, and the S&P 500 index increased.  The move higher in prices of U.S. 
equities—which market participants have attributed to the robust U.S. economic 
outlook, rising corporate earnings, and elevated stock buybacks—stood out against 
broad declines in risk assets across foreign markets.  
This underperformance in the rest of the world has been a trend observed since 
the start of the second quarter.  In particular, emerging markets have come under 
significant pressure, and several of these economies saw further sharp declines in the 
value of their currencies and prices of local financial assets early in the intermeeting 
period, as illustrated in the top-right panel.  The MSCI Emerging Markets ex China 
Equity Index, in dark blue, and the JP Morgan Emerging Market FX Index, in light 
blue, declined by 3 percent and 5 percent, respectively, over the intermeeting period.  
Financial market pressures were most acute in countries that have external and 
internal imbalances, high inflation, and perceived problems of policy credibility—in 
particular, Turkey and Argentina. 
Other than a few days on which Turkish asset prices declined sharply, however, 
there were only modest spillovers into developed markets over the period.  European 
banks were one exception, with the Euro Stoxx bank index, shown in red, declining 
by as much as 11 percent over the period, though these moves have partially retraced. 
These spillovers coincided with news reports naming several European banks as 
having a high exposure to Turkey, reflecting ownership stakes in local banks.  
Political developments in Italy that received attention in the spring and earlier in the 
summer have also weighed down prices of European bank shares.  Financial markets 
remain sensitive to developments in Italy and the ongoing budget negotiations there, 
but these were not viewed as a significant driver of global markets over this period. 
With regard to the recent weakness in emerging markets, the Desk’s September 
policy surveys included a special question on the drivers of the recent volatility.  
Respondents broadly cited the appreciation of the dollar and ongoing U.S. policy 
normalization, as well as rising U.S.–China trade tensions, as important drivers.  
Their responses also highlighted country-specific developments that sharpened 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
September 25–26, 2018
6 of 153


 
 
 
investor focus on long-standing vulnerabilities in certain countries, like Turkey.  
Importantly, most respondents did not express a high level of concern regarding 
broader contagion. 
Analysis of the Desk’s policy survey results has also been helpful in highlighting 
sources of uncertainty over the period ahead  The middle-left panel shows the results 
of a natural language processing program run on the responses for the emerging 
market volatility question.  Conditional on the selected word or words appearing 
more than five times in the responses, the panel shows the proportion of times that 
those words appear in the same sentence as words expressing uncertainty.  In a 
manner similar to our more subjective reading of the responses, references to 
“China,” “trade,” and “tariff” had the highest association with expressions of 
uncertainty.  Joe will discuss these issues some more in the IF briefing. 
More generally, trade developments as they pertain to China continued to be a 
major point of focus for market participants.  Earlier in the period, comments by U.S. 
Administration officials led to increased market discussion of potential U.S. 
intervention in foreign exchange markets.  The ongoing focus on trade also continued 
to place Chinese assets in the spotlight.  Specifically, a perception of rising trade 
tensions between the U.S. and Chinese governments and signs of slowing real growth 
in China were cited as continuing to drive declines in the Shanghai Composite, as 
shown by the dark blue line in the middle-right panel.  Over the period, the Shanghai 
Composite fell by as much as 8 percent before recovering to end lower by roughly 
3 percent. 
The renminbi, in contrast, was more stable, as Chinese policymakers were 
perceived as taking steps to stem further depreciation.  Paralleling some actions taken 
previously, policymakers reintroduced reserve requirements on FX forward purchases 
as well as a so-called countercyclical adjustment factor in the daily dollar–RMB 
fixing mechanism.  Remarks by senior officials were also seen as signaling support 
for the stability of the currency.  In addition, the Chinese authorities may have 
intervened on a small scale in currency markets to stabilize the renminbi. 
Market participants also took comfort from signals that Chinese policymakers will 
introduce additional stimulus to offset the effect of the U.S. tariffs and real effects of 
the crackdown on the shadow banking sector.  Indeed, expectations for further policy 
stimulus, as well as the recent tariff outcome and escalation reportedly being less 
severe than some feared, were cited as contributing to a rebound in the Shanghai 
Composite and prices of risk assets more generally last week. 
While market participants have been focused on the threat of slowing growth 
abroad, U.S. data over the intermeeting period continued to show strength.  The 
bottom-left panel shows a simple decomposition of daily changes in U.S. Treasury 
yields over the period, attributing the daily change to the most important driver cited 
on that day, according to the Desk’s market intelligence.  Yields declined, on net, on 
days when emerging market developments were cited as the main driver, shown in 
dark blue, but rose by even more on days when domestic data were cited, shown in 
September 25–26, 2018
7 of 153


 
 
 
light blue.  This left 2- and 10-year yields higher, on net, and the 10-year breakeven 
rate of inflation little changed.  
Policy expectations edged up over the intermeeting period, as shown in the 
bottom-right panel.  All respondents to the Desk’s policy surveys expect a hike at this 
meeting, and all but three expect a subsequent hike at the December meeting.  Market 
pricing is consistent with the survey responses:  A 25 basis point hike at this meeting 
is fully priced in, with an additional 20 basis points of tightening priced in between 
the September meeting and the end of the year.  Looking further out, survey 
respondents’ modal forecasts moved toward the June SEP “dots,” consistent with 
recent economic strength.  For the SEP, survey respondents generally anticipate that 
the median SEP dots will remain unchanged, and that the median dot in 2021 will be 
at the same level as in 2020. 
As shown in the top-left panel of your next exhibit, LIBOR–OIS spreads 
narrowed notably over the intermeeting period.  Market participants have cited, 
though with somewhat low conviction, recent trends in the CP/CD market as factors 
weighing on LIBOR submissions.  These include higher investor demand due to 
positive real rates and subdued growth in issuance, as well as the terming-out of 
issuance.  Neither the widening in LIBOR–OIS spreads earlier this year nor the 
subsequent narrowing in the third quarter reflects perceived changes in bank credit 
risk. 
Recall that in the first quarter, many contacts had believed that the large and 
unexpected increase in bill issuance pushed up LIBOR and thus widened the spread 
between LIBOR and OIS.  The recent narrowing in LIBOR and OIS, which has been 
much more rapid than had been implied by forward rates, as indicated by the pink 
diamonds, helps resolve some of the uncertainty about the relationship between 
LIBOR and Treasury bill issuance.  In particular, it suggests that the flow—rather 
than the stock—effect of an increase in the supply of Treasury bills may be more 
important for LIBOR, as the three-month LIBOR–OIS spread has continued to 
narrow, while the stock of Treasury bills outstanding has reached new highs but at a 
slower pace than in March.  The recent narrowing also suggests that impacts 
stemming from the repatriation of foreign earnings by U.S. multinational 
corporations, by reducing demand for CP/CD, had a larger effect in the first quarter.  
The channels through which repatriation would affect U.S. money markets are varied, 
however, and flows are hard to measure. 
Treasury bill supply, in addition to coupon issuance, remains important through 
its effect on broader money market rates.  Indeed, as shown in the top-right panel, the 
dispersion between Treasury bill yields, GC repo, federal funds, and Eurodollar rates 
has tightened within the upper portion of the target range since March.  This is due in 
part to the combined effect of the technical adjustment to the interest-on-reserves rate 
in June and the higher level of Treasury bills outstanding, along with high primary 
dealer inventories that have put upward pressure on rates. 
September 25–26, 2018
8 of 153


 
 
 
Consistent with the broad availability of higher-yielding alternatives, overnight 
RRP take-up remained low and stable, averaging $2.7 billion over the intermeeting 
period.  Notably, as shown in the middle-left panel, participation reached a record low 
of $10 million on September 5, with a sole participant bidding in the operation. 
As shown in the middle-right panel, the spread of both the effective federal funds 
rate and overnight bank funding rate over interest on reserves narrowed to 3 basis 
points over the intermeeting period.  The dynamics driving the increase in unsecured 
borrowing rates within the range are consistent with the factors discussed previously 
with the Committee, relating to demand by non-IOR arbitrage borrowers as well as 
investment decisions by Federal Home Loan Banks.  Banks borrowing due to 
nonarbitrage motivations—to manage their regulatory ratios, such as LCR, or to 
avoid daylight overdrafts—appear to have driven the recent increases.  With the 
decline in arbitrage activity, unsecured volumes have fallen. 
The bottom-left panel shows how the distribution of trades in the federal funds 
market has evolved over the past few weeks.  Based on previous experiences, as 
indicated by the close proximity of the black line to the volume of trading 2 basis 
points below the rate of interest on reserves, we think it’s likely that the effective rate 
will start to “print” consistently at 2 basis points below IOR over the next 
intermeeting period.  Indeed, Monday’s “print,” not shown, was at 1.93 percent.  
Further, if one looks at the pattern of trades in late August, there were a number of 
days when the median was close to “printing” either 4 basis points below or 2 basis 
points below interest on reserves.  We also expect to see similar patterns again, which 
may produce some local volatility in the effective rate.  This local volatility is more 
likely to occur with low volumes, as was discussed in the memo to research directors 
by Afonso and others. 
Last week there was a large drop in reserves as the Treasury increased its cash 
holdings at the Federal Reserve following the third-quarter tax receipt day.  The level 
of reserves last week was the lowest for a number of years apart from quarter-ends 
and close to some private-sector estimates of at what point reserve scarcity might 
appear.  Based on a wide range of indicators, there was no evidence of reserve 
scarcity.  Further, preliminary results of a new Federal Reserve survey specifically 
designed to obtain a high-quality estimate of at what point aggregate reserve scarcity 
might occur reinforce the staff baseline view that reserve scarcity is some way off.  
However, while aggregate reserve scarcity is not imminent, we are expecting some 
periods over the next few quarters, as reserves decline, when their distribution across 
the banking system produces trading dynamics that will lead some outside analysts to 
pronounce that reserve scarcity has been reached, as happened in June.  The staff will 
produce a memo on the new survey and money market dynamics ahead of the 
November FOMC meeting. 
Declines in reserve balances over the past year have been driven by the ongoing 
decline in SOMA holdings.  As shown in the bottom-right panel, the most recent 
Desk surveys corroborate market commentary of a relatively benign effect of the 
reduction in holdings on Treasury yields and MBS spreads thus far.  Indeed, 
September 25–26, 2018
9 of 153


 
 
 
comparing the matched sample of survey respondents in the June survey with the 
most recent, the expected impact on 10-year Treasury yields and 30-year MBS OAS 
during the two-year period following implementation of the change to reinvestment 
policy has declined.  Starting next month, the redemption caps will move to their 
maximum values.  At this point, reinvestment of Treasury securities will nearly 
exclusively occur in the middle month of each quarter, and under the baseline we 
expect no more reinvestment of MBS principal payments.  Of course, in view of the 
uncertainty regarding MBS prepayments, it is possible that some months will see 
small reinvestment amounts. 
I’ll conclude with a few operational updates.  First, the staff continues work on 
enhancing the data for the production of the OBFR.  Following the final notice on the 
reporting change to capture overnight wholesale borrowing activity, which moved 
from offshore to onshore branches, data collection will begin on October 1.  There 
will be a review of the new data and an evaluation of how their inclusion will affect 
the OBFR before its expected addition in mid-to-late 2019.  Additionally, over the 
intermeeting period a number of private and public institutions issued a small amount 
of debt linked to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, SOFR.  Although issuance 
tied to SOFR has been small, market contacts view this activity as consistent with the 
ongoing gradual adoption of SOFR.  Further, open interest in SOFR futures and 
derivatives continues to grow modestly. 
Second, the Desk has completed its annual review of the management of foreign 
exchange reserves held in the SOMA and ESF portfolios.  The review of the purposes 
and objectives of the reserves, as well as the analysis of liquidity needs and risk 
parameter settings, resulted in very few changes to the target portfolios from the 
previous period as described in a memo that Lorie and I sent to the Committee.  The 
Desk will seek instructions from the Foreign Currency Subcommittee that incorporate 
the recommended parameters by the end of the month and begin to rebalance to the 
new target asset allocation for the euro portfolio over the course of October.  Please 
let us or the subcommittee members know if you have any questions or concerns. 
Third, the Desk executed a small-value purchase operation of $100 million in 
Treasury bills in August.  Consistent with conducting the full range of operations of 
such securities, the Desk plans to execute a small-value bill sale, roll over bill 
securities, and let a portion mature in the future. 
As usual, the appendix contains a list of all of the small-value exercises conducted 
over the intermeeting period, including a test TDF operation, along with a list of 
upcoming exercises.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We would be happy to address any 
questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Questions for Simon or Lorie?  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I just have one, and maybe this is on panel 5.  You didn’t mention the 
ECB.  I was just wondering what your judgment was, or the Desk’s impressions were, of what 
September 25–26, 2018
10 of 153


 
 
 
was announced by the ECB.  What impact did that have on 10-year Treasury yields—if any 
material impact? 
MR. POTTER.  I think the most significant announcements were in July, when, basically, 
President Draghi indicated that they wouldn’t be changing their overnight rate through the 
summer of 2019.  There’s been some market discussion of what “through the summer” means, 
but that basically meant—until yesterday and today, which we didn’t include—not that much 
discussion of future ECB policy.  They have a number of issues facing them.  It seems very 
likely they will stop adding to their balance sheet through asset purchases. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Right. 
MR. POTTER.  How they design the reinvestments on those asset purchases is something 
of interest.  But I think most of that effect stemming from the July meeting was in the previous 
report that we gave you. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Okay. 
MR. POTTER.  It will be interesting to see over the next few days, as there’s a little bit of 
confusion on some comments President Draghi made, if that has some effect. 
MR. KAPLAN.  There was a lot of market scuttlebutt in August, but you’re saying—
your judgment is, not much material effect. 
MR. POTTER.  I think that most people took President Draghi as having got a pretty 
good consensus through the summer of 2019.  A very important issue in the coming months is 
that the executive board of the ECB is going to change in a very dramatic way.  A lot of market 
focus is on who will be the new president of the ECB. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Okay.  Thank you. 
September 25–26, 2018
11 of 153


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Further questions?  If not, we now need a vote to ratify the 
domestic open market operations conducted since the July–August meeting.  Do I have a motion 
to approve? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All those in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Thanks very much.  So 
now we will turn to the review of the economic and financial situation, including the summary of 
economic projections.  David Wilcox, would you like to start us off? 
MR. WILCOX.2  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the packet titled 
“Material for Briefing on the U.S. Outlook.”  I’ve taken it upon myself this afternoon 
to avert the potential incipient catastrophe of an early adjournment, so you’ll find that 
my remarks run a little longer than usual.  [Laughter]  I’m going to review briefly the 
current economic situation and then give you my interpretation of the yield-curve 
inversion that features in the staff baseline projection. 
As shown by the black line in your first panel, we continue to estimate that real 
output is 2¼ percent above its potential level in the current quarter.  As shown by the 
blue line, and not entirely by coincidence, our preferred model on this issue implies a 
broadly similar view.  These assessments of resource utilization have not been much 
affected by the indicators that have become available since the July meeting, 
including the BEA’s comprehensive revision of the national income accounts. 
We now anticipate that real GDP growth will average a little more than 3 percent 
this year, well above our estimate of potential output growth.  As shown in panel 2, 
we continue to see real output rising another 2½ percent in 2019—again, fast enough 
to imply a further tightening in resource utilization. 
Regarding the news that has become available since the Tealbook forecast closed 
12 days ago, the retail sales data were a good bit stronger than we expected, while 
housing starts and permits were somewhat weaker.  As Joe Gruber will discuss in 
greater detail, the additional tariffs that took effect yesterday imply a little further 
drag on domestic activity.  And Hurricane Florence made landfall.  On net, this 
information caused us to mark up our second-half forecast slightly but left our 
medium-term outlook essentially unrevised.  The bullets in panel 3 give some detail 
about how we think Florence will affect specific indicators in the next few months. 
The chart at the back of your packet, which I would refer you to, contains some 
extremely cool data that we developed here using a facility that has been set up with 
us by a company called First Data Corporation.  The chart shows how Florence has 
 
2 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
September 25–26, 2018
12 of 153


 
 
 
affected national-level retail sales relative to normal since a week before Florence 
made landfall, and it compares Florence with other recent hurricanes.  The data 
underlying these estimates represent about 20 percent of all electronic card 
transactions nationwide.  These data bolster our expectation that, while the human toll 
arising from Florence has been considerable, the hit to consumer spending will be 
transitory and relatively small. 
Returning to panel 2, over the next couple of years, the gradual tightening of the 
stance of monetary policy that our policy rule prescribes, together with the emergence 
of some supply constraints, acts to slow the growth of output, eventually bringing it in 
line with potential growth in 2020 and dropping it below the pace of potential 
in 2021. 
Meanwhile, the labor market has continued to strengthen about in line with our 
expectations.  The red line in panel 4 shows the BLS’s estimate of monthly private 
payroll gains through August, while the black line shows an alternative estimate 
based on data that we receive from ADP.  A pooled estimate that combines BLS and 
ADP information—shown as the blue line—puts the increase in private payroll 
employment in August at 210,000, consistent with a further tightening in labor market 
conditions.  In addition, ADP data for the first three weeks of September point to 
another solid private payroll gain this month.  On the household side, the overall 
unemployment rate was 3.9 percent in August—down ½ percentage point from a year 
ago and about ¾ percentage point below our estimate of its natural rate. 
As you can see in panel 5, the continued improvement in labor market conditions 
has been broadly shared across races and ethnicities, with each group’s 
unemployment rate currently at or below the levels that were reached at the end of the 
previous expansion.  That said, little to no progress has been made in shifting the 
relative alignment of these unemployment rates, and we have no reason to doubt that 
when the economy next weakens, the gaps between unemployment rates for these 
groups will widen again. 
As shown by the black line in panel 6, we have the aggregate unemployment rate 
reaching a low of 3.2 percent in 2020 before gradually moving up to 3.4 percent by 
the end of 2021.  In the out-years of the projection, this path of the unemployment 
rate is a couple of tenths lower than the one we wrote down in July.  One-tenth of that 
downward revision reflects our having taken down our estimate of the natural rate by 
another tenth, to 4.6 percent.  The other tenth reflects the fact that we took the 
occasion of the comprehensive NIPA revision to do some other housekeeping on the 
supply side of the projection as well.  As has been the case in recent Tealbooks, our 
unemployment rate would be even lower if we had not assumed that the tight labor 
market will also put upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. 
Regarding inflation, as shown by the red line in panel 7 on your next page, PCE 
prices excluding food and energy rose 2 percent over the next 12 months ending in 
July, ½ percentage point faster than a year ago.  Of course, inflation can be quite 
volatile, even on a 12-month change basis, so it’s worth asking how durable this 
September 25–26, 2018
13 of 153


 
 
 
pickup is likely to be.  To shed light on that question, panel 7 also plots two 
additional measures of underlying PCE price inflation.  Specifically, the orange line 
gives the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean measure, while the blue line 
gives an estimate using a factor model that decomposes PCE price inflation into a 
common component—which is plotted here—and an idiosyncratic component.  
A pair of memos that you received recently—one by Matteo Luciani and Riccardo 
Trezzi of the Board’s staff, the other by Evan Koenig of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Dallas—compared the usefulness of the index excluding food and energy prices and 
the trimmed mean index.  Currently, there is little need to choose between the two, as 
both indexes—as well as the model-based common component—point to an upward 
shift in the distribution of PCE price changes over the past year. 
Based on our translation of the CPI and PPI data, we estimate that total PCE 
prices, the black line in panel 8, rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in 
August, and that core prices, the red line, rose 1.9 percent.  Core inflation is 
anticipated to remain just under 2 percent through the end of this year.  Total PCE 
inflation is expected to move down closer to core as large energy price increases at 
the end of last year fall out of the 12-month window. 
Panels 9 and 10 summarize the medium-term inflation outlook that we showed in 
the Tealbook.  As shown in panel 9, core inflation is projected to creep along mostly 
just above 2 percent, reflecting tight resource utilization and a slight further uptick in 
trend inflation.  And as shown in panel 10, total PCE price inflation has a similarly 
flat profile.  Compared with what we built into the Tealbook forecast 12 days ago, the 
additional tariffs that were implemented yesterday will add a tenth to inflation 
in 2019. 
Panel 11 shows the four measures of labor compensation growth that we follow 
regularly.  We continue to read these data as suggesting that hourly compensation 
growth is inching up, though it’s impossible to be sure, considering how differently 
these various series can behave and how erratic they can be from year to year.  We 
put the most weight on the ECI—the black line—partly because it’s less noisy than 
the other available measures.  That measure now stands at just under 3 percent on a 
12-month change basis, up from about 2½ percent a year ago.  As I’ve noted before, 
we don’t have much trouble explaining the recent evolution of the ECI, in conditions 
of an increasingly tight labor market, relatively well-anchored inflation expectations, 
and continued lackluster trend productivity gains. 
Let us turn now to the yield curve.  As you know, for some time a feature of our 
projection has been that we have the yield curve inverting.  For example, in the 
current Tealbook forecast, the federal funds rate, shown as the black line in panel 12, 
moves above the 10-year Treasury yield, the red line, in early 2020.  Many different 
interpretations of that phenomenon have been given.  For the remainder of my 
remarks, I’d like to give you my interpretation of the inversion we show in the 
baseline forecast and give as well some reasons why it might not work out that way. 
September 25–26, 2018
14 of 153


 
 
 
Some bullets on your next page summarize the main points.  The basic story 
begins with our baseline judgment that the unemployment rate is currently below its 
natural rate.  In the framework that we use to put the baseline forecast together, the 
unemployment rate eventually needs to return to its natural rate.  In that framework, if 
U were to remain below U* forever, then inflation would eventually move above the 
Committee’s 2 percent objective and would never return to your objective.  In other 
words, on our baseline assumptions, it will not be possible to run a “hot” economy 
forever without also experiencing inflation above your 2 percent objective.  The 
policy rule that we use in putting together the baseline forecast cools the labor market 
back to its sustainable position by moving the funds rate for the next several years 
well above where it will need to be in the longer run.  This is one key ingredient in 
generating the inverted yield curve.  I would note, by the way, that even under the 
baseline monetary policy, which is more aggressive than the one implicit in your SEP 
median, the process of returning U to U* is quite drawn out.  It takes about 8 to 10 
years for the labor market to be returned to a sustainable condition. 
The other key ingredient in generating an inverted yield curve is a term premium 
that is quite low by historical standards.  The low term premium means that the short-
term rate doesn’t need to move all that far above its long-run forward-moving average 
for the yield curve to invert.  During the 8 to 10 years in which U is rising back up to 
U*, real GDP growth runs—essentially by definition—slower than potential growth.  
Furthermore, we have potential growth remaining pretty low by historical standards. 
Combined, these two factors imply that actual real GDP growth in our baseline 
outlook is positive but quite low, not all that far from zero, during the period of 
re-equilibration.  During that period, the economy will be especially vulnerable to 
negative shocks.  In our baseline forecast, we do not anticipate that negative shocks 
will occur over the next decade.  But, as history plays out, of course, such shocks will 
occur.  And in the context of already slow growth of actual real GDP, only a 
relatively modest set of adverse shocks could be sufficient to tip the economy into 
recession. 
The bottom line is that in the baseline forecast, the inverted yield curve is not an 
independent driver of an imminent recession.  In our framework, it results almost 
mechanically from the combination of our assumption that U is currently below U*, 
and that it will not be able to remain there over the long term.  If that’s the baseline 
story, what are some alternatives?  Why might the yield curve not invert? 
One possibility is that the natural rate of unemployment could be lower than we 
currently think.  In that case, U might not have to rise as far—or might not have to 
rise at all—in order to get up to U*.  You—meaning, in this case, “you” [laughter]—
might have less work to do in terms of returning the economy to a sustainable 
position. 
A second possibility is that trend inflation might not converge to your 2 percent 
objective as we’ve assumed it does in the baseline, or it might move up even more 
slowly than we have assumed.  In this alternative view, inflation expectations might 
September 25–26, 2018
15 of 153


 
 
 
be anchored but, inconveniently enough, possibly not at a level consistent with your 
2 percent objective.  In that case, the economy might need to run a little to the “hot” 
side of sustainable, at least for a time, in order to maintain inflation at 2 percent. 
A third possibility is that you may choose to implement a monetary policy that’s 
even more patient than the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.  However, I would note that if 
you go that route, you will need to be very patient.  Even in the optimal control 
exercise reported in Tealbook A that assigns zero cost to the unemployment rate 
being below the natural rate, the funds rate moves slightly above the 10-year Treasury 
rate about five years from now. 
A fourth possibility is that aggregate demand could be much more interest-elastic 
than we have assumed in the baseline.  In other words, you might get much more 
“bang for the basis point” of tightening than we have assumed in the baseline. 
All told, although the baseline framework hangs together logically, there is no 
shortage of ways it could prove inaccurate in ways that will matter for this issue.  My 
main “takeaway” messages are the following.  In our baseline framework, the 
inverted yield curve is not an independent causal factor that triggers the next 
recession.  It does reflect an effort by the policymaker in our baseline assumption to 
bring the unemployment rate back up to its sustainable rate as part of that 
policymaker’s pursuit of the dual-mandate objectives, and it is associated with a 
heightened risk of recession during a period of subpar real GDP growth. 
As Damjan Pfajfar showed in his pre-FOMC briefing to the Board last week, the 
probability that the economy will be in recession sometime during the next four 
quarters is quite low, according to the models he inspected—well below the 
unconditional probability of about 15 percent.  Once the unemployment rate has 
begun rising back toward its sustainable level, the probability of recession will move 
above its unconditional level—and by quite a lot, according to some models. 
The historical record suggests that the proverbial “soft landing from below” will 
be difficult to achieve.  However, in the smooth, shock-free world of our baseline 
projection, it is possible.  And if the key assumptions implicit in the baseline outlook 
are accurate, you will probably have to give it a shot if you want to limit the size and 
duration of the overshoot of your 2 percent inflation objective.  Joe will now continue 
our presentation. 
MR. GRUBER.3  Thanks, David.  I’ll be referring to the “Material for Briefing on 
the International Outlook” slide deck.  Disappointing data have led us to revise down 
our outlook for foreign growth in 2018, providing further confirmation, following 
earlier markdowns, that the momentum coming from a strong 2017 was less 
persistent than we had been anticipating at the start of the year.  That said, overall 
foreign growth remains solid, about in line with its potential—the black diamonds in 
the right panel—and our estimate of the aggregate output gap abroad is about closed.  
 
3 The materials used by Mr. Gruber are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
September 25–26, 2018
16 of 153


 
 
 
Of course, even this respectable performance might be viewed somewhat 
disappointingly against the backdrop of a booming U.S. economy.  At the same time, 
risks to the foreign outlook have risen, including financial stresses in the emerging 
markets and increased trade tensions—two topics I will return to later in my briefing. 
As shown on the upper-left panel of your next slide, core inflation continues to 
run on the soft side in the euro area and Japan, notwithstanding energy-induced 
bumps to headline inflation, as shown on the right.  The spot price of Brent crude oil 
has climbed almost $8 per barrel since your previous meeting, in part due to the fact 
that Iranian production has turned down in anticipation of strict U.S. sanctions set to 
begin in early November.  Guided by the experience of an earlier round of sanctions, 
expectations are for further production declines ahead. 
As shown on the next page, with inflation subdued, monetary policy in the 
advanced foreign economies is expected to remain accommodative.  This, combined 
with a staff forecast of U.S. tightening that exceeds market expectations, underlines 
our forecast of dollar appreciation over the projection period.  The jumping-off point 
for our dollar forecast is also higher, primarily against emerging market currencies, 
with financial stresses weighing notably on a few currencies in particular. 
Broad indicators of EME stress, shown in your next slide on the left, have reached 
their highest levels since late 2015 and early 2016, when concerns about China 
temporarily roiled global markets.  So far, as shown on the right, this latest outbreak 
of financial stress has been largely confined to those countries—such as Argentina 
and Turkey—with the most pronounced domestic vulnerabilities, including a heavy 
reliance on external financing and high inflation rates.  Accordingly, the imprint on 
our overall forecast has been modest.  However, there is certainly a risk, against a 
backdrop of rising U.S. interest rates and a higher dollar, that these stresses could 
become more pronounced or widespread, especially when interacted with rising trade 
tensions. 
  As indicated on your next slide, following the implementation yesterday of a 
10 percent tariff on approximately $180 billion worth of imports from China, tariff 
increases since the beginning of the year now affect 13 percent of U.S. non-oil 
merchandise imports, with an average tariff increase of about 15 percentage points.  
Although foreign retaliation in response to earlier rounds of U.S. tariffs roughly 
matched our actions, China’s response on Monday was more limited, in part because 
China has more or less run out of U.S. exports to tax. 
 As indicated on the next page, we expect the recent tariffs and retaliation to 
depress both U.S. exports and imports, shown by the gap between the solid and 
dashed lines, but exports a little less so, reflecting China’s less-than-full retaliation.  
Overall, comparing the blue bars in the right-hand panel with the black dots, the 
tariffs have had an almost imperceptible positive effect on our forecast of net exports.  
They do little to offset the sizable drag on growth we expect next year, as the higher 
dollar weighs on exports and boosts imports. 
September 25–26, 2018
17 of 153


 
 
 
 As discussed on your next slide, we have incorporated the effects of the 
implemented tariffs into our outlook for both inflation and activity, though, at this 
point, the adjustments are quite small.  The cumulative effect of the tariffs 
implemented so far this year is expected to boost the price of imports by about 
2 percent over the next couple of quarters.  This in turn will add about 0.2 percent to 
the level of core PCE prices by the end of 2019.  Higher prices then lower 
consumption and investment, resulting in a small negative drag of only about 
0.1 percent on the level of U.S. GDP.  The tariffs have also led us to lower our growth 
forecast for China, although the effects of the tariffs are partially offset by the more 
stimulative policy. 
Of course, these estimates are highly uncertain.  Because, for now, the bulk of the 
tariffs have been directed only at China, the effects could be even smaller if U.S. 
firms were able to redirect trade, without much cost, toward countries currently 
unaffected.  On the other hand, were further and more widespread trade barriers to be 
erected, this could have more substantial effects, including depressing productivity 
growth by reducing the incentive for U.S. firms to innovate and compete.  This 
scenario is explored in the Risks and Uncertainty section of the Tealbook. 
Outside the rather small impact of the already implemented tariffs, it is also 
possible that the considerable uncertainty regarding future U.S. trade policy could be 
weighing, or will start to weigh, on growth.  As shown on your next slide, trade 
policy uncertainty, as measured by an index of newspaper coverage, has spiked far 
above anything seen in recent history.  With NAFTA negotiations still under way, an 
unclear path regarding the resolution of tit-for-tat tariffs with China, and a broader, 
more generalized concern about the fate of the postwar multilateral trading system, 
there remains plenty to be uncertain about.  In theory, this elevated uncertainty could 
be weighing on investment, as firms wait for resolution before embarking on costly 
and potentially multiyear capital expenditures.  However, as was discussed in a 
September 14 memo to the FOMC, any negative effects of elevated uncertainty on 
investment and activity are not readily apparent in the data.  For example, business 
fixed investment was strong in the first half of the year, even surpassing the pace of 
growth that might be expected on the basisof both the strength of output and tax cut–
induced declines in the user cost of capital. 
Your next slide examines disaggregated industry-level data ranked by trade 
exposure.  Looking at the relationship between recent employment growth and the 
importance of trade, it is hard to discern much reaction to trade policy uncertainty.  
This is true generally, as shown in the left panels, across industries ranked by percent 
of imported inputs, in the top panel, or by exports, in the bottom, with not much of a 
relationship in either case.  Looking at the right, we don’t see much of a relationship 
even for those industries most dependent on trade with China.  Of course, the data in 
these panels all predate yesterday’s tariffs, and it is possible that stronger 
relationships could develop over time. 
As discussed on your next slide, it could be that the negative effects of trade 
uncertainty are being masked by other factors, including recent cuts to corporate tax 
September 25–26, 2018
18 of 153


 
 
 
rates or the overall strength of the economy.  In the presence of obscuring factors, a 
reasonable approach would be to estimate the effects of trade uncertainty using 
historical relationships.  However, as the current situation is largely unprecedented in 
the modern era, there is little history to go on, and this approach results in poorly 
estimated coefficients.  The panel depicts the estimated response of investment to a 
trade policy shock as measured by the newspaper index shown earlier and included in 
a vector autoregression with other control variables.  As you can see, the confidence 
bands are wide. 
In the memo, we investigated a number of alternative approaches to overcome the 
lack of historical precedent and derive estimated trade policy effects.  One approach, 
discussed on your last slide, draws on the work of Board economists Dario Caldara 
and Matteo Iacoviello.  They look at firm-level measures of trade policy uncertainty, 
with two examples shown in the panel, constructed on the basis of textual analysis of 
quarterly earnings calls.  The firm-level measures show notable variation across time, 
providing a basis for estimating the responsiveness of firm-level investment to such 
uncertainty.  By aggregating the firm-level responses, albeit with some fairly heroic 
assumptions, they estimate that the current increase in trade policy uncertainty could 
be reducing investment by up to 2 percent, with a corresponding reduction in real 
GDP of about ¼ percent.  However, the plausible range of estimates is wide, and the 
true effects could be either negligible or considerably larger, especially if tensions 
were to intensify, cover a larger segment of trade, or persist.  At this point, we have 
not incorporated any effects of trade policy uncertainty into our baseline forecast, but 
we will continue to monitor closely for potential effects.  And now I will hand off to 
Jeff. 
MR. HUTHER.4  Thank you.  I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material 
for Briefing on Summary of Economic Projections.”  Your median projections for the 
key economic variables are little changed from June.  Most of you marked up your 
projections for near-term real GDP growth, with many of you attributing these 
changes to the effects of fiscal stimulus, accommodative financial conditions, or 
business optimism.  In contrast, about half of you now forecast a higher 
unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of 2018 than before, and no one lowered 
their unemployment rate for 2018.  As before, most of you anticipate the 
unemployment rate bottoming out in 2019 or 2020, and nearly all of you see PCE 
inflation mildly overshooting your longer-run objective at some point.  The additional 
year of projections added this round shows that many of you expect real GDP growth 
to fall below its longer-run rate in 2021, with a corresponding modest rise in the 
unemployment rate. 
Exhibit 1 summarizes your economic projections, which, as you know, are 
conditional on your individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.  Having 
upgraded your forecasts of real GDP in the near term, all of you project growth to 
slow over the projection horizon.  Although the 2021 median growth rate matches the 
longer-run median, at the individual level, nine of you project 2021 growth to fall 
 
4 The materials used by Mr. Huther are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
September 25–26, 2018
19 of 153


 
 
 
below your assessments of the longer-run rate.  Some of you pointed to fading fiscal 
stimulus, reduced monetary policy accommodation, or a stronger dollar as reasons for 
slower growth.  As the second panel shows, your median unemployment rate 
projection is 3.7 percent at the end of this year, 3.5 percent over the next two years, 
and rising a touch in 2021, but it’s still well below your longer-run estimates.  Your 
projections of inflation in the lower panels are little changed from June and are at or 
near the target rate throughout the projection period.  Many of you expressed the view 
that inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
Exhibit 2 reports your assessments of the appropriate level of the federal funds 
rate.  The median expected level of the funds rate is 2.4 percent for the end of this 
year, 3.1 for 2019, and 3.4 for both 2020 and 2021.  Note that from 2020 to 2021, six 
of you project a decrease in the funds rate, although the longer-run median level is 
now 0.1 percentage point higher.  Those of you increasing your pro.jections of the 
longer-run funds rate cited increases in model-based estimates of longer-run interest 
rates and strong economic data since June. 
The red diamonds and green squares in exhibit 2 show the funds rate prescriptions 
derived from plugging your projections for inflation, unemployment, and the longer-
run funds rate into the non-inertial and inertial Taylor rules, respectively.  As was the 
case in June, the rates prescribed by the non-inertial Taylor rule are notably higher 
than your projections, reach a peak earlier, and then taper more slowly toward longer-
run values.  By construction, the prescribed paths under the inertial Taylor rule start 
out much closer to your projected levels, but the gap widens steadily over the 
projection period.  Most of you noted that your paths of the funds rate are lower than 
the Tealbook baseline; the explanations you offered for this difference included lower 
inflationary pressures and fading fiscal stimulus. 
The panels of exhibit 3 show your perceptions of the uncertainty and risks 
associated with your projections.  Most of you continue to see the uncertainty 
associated with your projections, the left panels, as broadly similar to the average 
levels over the past 20 years.  Risks to the outlook, shown to the right, are generally 
viewed as balanced, although a few more of you now see risks to inflation as 
weighted to the upside.  In your comments, some of you pointed to upside risks 
associated with fiscal policy, with these participants noting that expansionary 
pressures could be greater than projected.  On the downside risks, most of you 
expressed concerns about the effects of trade and fiscal policies.  In addition, many of 
you mentioned potential stresses related to developments abroad or the effects of a 
stronger dollar.  Thank you.  That concludes my prepared remarks.  We would be 
happy to answer to your questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Questions for David, Joe, and Jeff?  President 
Kashkari. 
September 25–26, 2018
20 of 153


 
 
 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, you talked about how you lowered 
the natural rate of unemployment estimate, and it’s been coming down.  It’s been coming down 
for me, too, over the past three years.  I’m just wondering, is there any way to go back and learn 
from those errors?  Are we getting better at estimating the natural rate, or is it just—we can’t get 
better, it is what it is, and we just have to look at what’s happening and update our forecasts?  I 
think, for inflation, you’ve gone back and decomposed misses and said, “Well, now we 
understand why the miss occurred.”  Are we learning anything from these natural rate 
adjustments?  And this isn’t meant as a criticism. 
MR. WASCHER.  So I don’t think we’re getting any better at estimating the natural rate.  
As noted in the Tealbook, in past episodes when the economy was strong, we tended to lower the 
natural rate faster than was warranted.  We ended up revising it back up after the fact.  So, this 
time, we were being cautious about revising it down.  But as data have continued to come out 
and the unemployment rate has moved lower with not a whole lot of sign of inflation, we’ve 
moved it down a little bit.  We made another slight reduction this time. 
It’s really judgment, I think.  There’s a wide range of uncertainty associated with any 
estimate of the natural rate, and we felt this better balanced the risks.  But with the Phillips curve 
so flat, it’s pretty hard to be very convinced about any particular number that we’ve written 
down. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So this is for David Wilcox.  On your 
narrative about the yield curve—I just wanted to push on this a little bit—the narrative is that 
recessions are caused by shocks.  And if you look at the inversion evidence over the postwar era, 
September 25–26, 2018
21 of 153


 
 
 
it’s pretty strong that recessions have followed inversions.  So is what you’re saying that those 
shocks just happened to occur right after the inversions during the postwar era?  And if that’s the 
case, what are the chances that that would have occurred sort of randomly?  Because you’re 
saying you want to have a theory in which yield-curve inversions are not causal but are kind of 
associated, nevertheless, with recessions.  That’s the way I understood your narrative. 
MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  So several of the post–World War II recessions were associated 
with deliberate moves by the Federal Open Market Committee to tighten monetary policy in 
order to bring inflation down, and that factor just isn’t present today.  So those episodes, I think, 
are not particularly informative for future prospects. 
MR. BULLARD.  Wasn’t that the same story—they were going to slow the growth rate 
of the economy, raise the unemployment rate, in order to reduce inflationary pressure in the 
economy? 
MR. WILCOX.  I would say it a little differently.  I mean, just go back to what is, in my 
mind, perhaps the clearest case study of all, the Volcker disinflation and the pair of recessions in 
the early 1980s.  I think there was a pretty clear determination on the part of Chairman Volcker 
and his colleagues at the time that inflation had gotten so far out of hand that even potentially 
quite serious recession costs would need to be incurred in order to bring inflation down, and that 
that was a price that would have to be accepted. 
Now, I think the situation today, obviously, could hardly be more different from the one 
that was confronting Volcker and his colleagues in 1979 when inflation was running many, many 
percentage points higher than it is today.  And your concern, as I have heard it, over the past 
many meetings, over five years or so, has been inflation that has, up until now, been running 
notably, annoyingly below your objective.  Now you’ve come up close to attaining your inflation 
September 25–26, 2018
22 of 153


 
 
 
objective.  So, really, the issue that you’re wrestling with is what the position of real activity is 
relative to its sustainable position. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So let me see if I can restate that.  The previous Committees 
have taken recession risk, because they had an inflation problem and they wanted to balance the 
inflation risk against the recession risk, whereas today we don’t have as much of an inflation 
problem and may want to take less recession risk. 
MR. WILCOX.  Except I’d put it a little differently.  I wouldn’t say that they took 
recession risk.  I mean, this is the line of thinking that gave rise to David Romer and Christina 
Romer identifying specific episodes as moments when the Committee made a deliberate policy 
choice to flip in their approach to managing aggregate demand and to tighten policy even at the 
cost of incurring a recession. 
MR. BULLARD.  Are you putting the post-1985 recessions in this same category? 
MR. WILCOX.  No. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So those also had yield-curve inversions. 
MR. WILCOX.  Correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  So those were just shocks that occurred after the yield-curve inversion. 
MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  And those, I think, are informative for thinking about this.  Now, 
we’re down at that point to a sample size of two, which is pretty small even by usual 
macroeconomic standards.  [Laughter]  Three. 
MR. BULLARD.  Three. 
MR. WILCOX.  So the narrative that I tried to tell was one in which the policymaker in 
our baseline projection slows actual growth below that of potential.  Potential growth itself is 
quite slow by historical standards. 
September 25–26, 2018
23 of 153


 
 
 
Another ingredient—since my text was already long—that I think is at play is that I do 
think our macro models don’t fully capture the dynamics that take over when recessionary 
dynamics are in play.  I think there is some kind of a nonlinearity that our nice, smooth linear 
models with Gaussian shocks don’t do a good job of capturing when the economy is operating at 
a slow rate of growth.  It’s almost essentially a matter of just arithmetic that a relatively mild 
adverse shock, I think, will put the economy at risk of tipping into a situation in which those 
nonlinear recessionary dynamics can take over.  I don’t think that changes the basic sort of 
calculus or problem that you all would confront if the baseline were to prove accurate.  I did try 
to indicate multiple different ways in which the baseline projection could prove inaccurate. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, you talked so much after that, I’m feeling 
less comfortable about the question I’m about to ask.  But, at any rate [laughter], I was attracted to 
a comment that I heard you make about the yield-curve inversions:  the increased risk of a shock 
taking us into a recession and the fact that most of those were earlier experiences when inflation 
was above the Committee’s target. 
Now, I’m attracted to that, because I tend to think that the issue about whether we can 
achieve a soft landing in part is because we previously had to do a couple of things, and one of 
them was to get inflation down to a lower inflation objective and then deal with the cycle.  With 
that in mind, you used the Taylor (1999) inertial rule, and I fully support using those rules the 
way that you do, but do any of those same issues come into play?  Because a good part of the 
estimation there is during a period when the FOMC presumably was responding more strongly to 
the output gap in an attempt to bring down inflation.  Would adjusting the intercept term be 
enough to take onboard the fact that the inflation objective experience was better? 
September 25–26, 2018
24 of 153


 
 
 
MR. WILCOX.  So we don’t have a 2 percent intercept as in the original formulation.  I 
am asking for a lifeline, Thomas. 
MR. LAUBACH.  In the simple rules that we are simulating, we are using the 0.5 percent 
longer-run assumption. 
MR. WILCOX.  Yes, that’s right.  Thank you.  So in the staff projection, our r*—our 
assumed level of the real neutral interest rate—is ½ percent, and so that’s what is used in that 
Taylor (1999) inertial rule that we use to derive the policy rate path. 
MR. EVANS.  But with a flatter Phillips curve, and with more weight on the output gap, 
you’re trying to push down inflation a bit more.  I just wonder if we’d made more progress, if 
maybe that’s a little strong, and if you’d considered that. 
MR. WILCOX.  I don’t know the answer to that. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Further questions?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  One more question.  I know we’ve talked about this before in the 
Summary of Economic Projections, but why are we putting the Taylor rule on this picture?  
Remind me. 
MR. LAUBACH.  If I may say, upon popular demand.  [Laughter]  No, I think it’s 
simply— 
MR. BULLARD.  I want to see what the Committee is saying and where the Committee 
dots are.  I don’t really want to see somebody else’s rule or something. 
MR. WILCOX.  We can obscure it.  That would be fine.  It does illustrate one particular 
point, which is, if you take your right-hand-side variables and feed them, in a static way, into 
either a non-inertial or an inertial version of that rule, out comes a funds rate trajectory that’s 
higher.  So a piece of information that you can read off that chart is that the reaction function that 
September 25–26, 2018
25 of 153


 
 
 
you have implicit in your SEP submissions is more accommodative than Taylor (1999), inertial 
or non-inertial.  Now, if you don’t find that useful, that’s fine.  We’ll hand out special glasses 
that will [laughter] not show that particular color of ink. 
MR. BULLARD.  That was useful. 
MR. QUARLES. I’d vote for it. 
MR. WILCOX.  You want the glasses?  [Laughter] 
MS. BRAINARD.  Maybe it would be more interesting for you to try to give us a rule 
that fits the median and let us take a look and see if we are coherent or not. 
MR. WILCOX.  It would be helpful if you’d give us a rule—  [Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  We can do it at the same time, we can exchange them. 
MR. WILCOX.  At 12 paces. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Joking aside, I mean, of course, there has been various staff work over 
the years on trying to infer individual participant reaction functions on the basis of the SEP 
numbers.  I would always caution, again, that this is working with very few observations.  So, for 
example, if on this particular occasion we wanted to fit the rule to the medians, we have four 
observations.  The Taylor rule has about as many parameters.  So you can play around with this 
in many different ways and rationalize it.  I’d be a little cautious about whether that was really 
shedding much light—whether we are really able to uncover either your median or individual 
reaction functions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Great.  Further questions?  [No response]  Hearing none, why 
don’t we begin with our economic go-round, starting with President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I had expected my conversations with 
businesses over the intermeeting period to be quite focused on the tariff war between China and 
September 25–26, 2018
26 of 153


 
 
 
the United States.  But, although most businesses were quite negative about the increase in tariffs 
both as a policy and on how it might affect their own businesses, tariffs were not the primary 
concern. 
Their primary concern was the tightness in the labor market that they viewed as limiting 
both them and their suppliers, which were running operations with more job vacancies than they 
were comfortable with.  One reason for their absence of concern over tariffs was expressed by a 
manufacturer in the Greater Boston area.  He highlighted that, because of the tariffs, his firm 
now has more leeway to raise prices.  Previously, he had been concerned that he could not pass 
on higher labor costs, and, as a result, his margins were being squeezed.  However, he was now 
receiving little resistance to passing on price increases that were covering both the very visible 
rise in the cost of steel and aluminum and also some of the costs of paying higher salaries. 
These types of stories highlighted one of the unintended consequences of the tariffs—that 
suppliers may now feel they have more price flexibility—posing an upside risk to the inflation 
forecast.  In light of the lack of comparable tariff situations in recent data, I agree with the strong 
caveats expressed in the Tealbook about the heightened uncertainty surrounding our ability to 
estimate the economic effect. 
However, I view this as more of a war on global supply chains than just a tariff dispute.  
By requiring tariffs on a wide variety of Chinese exports, the ability to depend on China as a 
significant source in the global supply chain has become much more uncertain.  Retailers I have 
talked with have indicated that they have limited ability to substitute for Chinese goods in the 
short run—with implications for Christmas sales, should the tariffs persist—but they are already 
seeking ways in which to diversify supply chains in order to include alternatives to Chinese 
exports. 
September 25–26, 2018
27 of 153


 
 
 
Almost regardless of the tariff outcome, these retailers have emphasized that they will no 
longer feel comfortable single-sourcing products despite possible cost advantages.  They will 
much more consciously seek to have a broader set of countries from which to source their 
products.  As these diversification strategies and other supply adjustments are likely to play out 
over an extended period, the movement to less-optimal supply chains is likely to imply a modest 
upward bias to our inflation forecast over the next several years.  In a tight labor market, these 
staggered pricing changes have the potential to become more solidly incorporated into the 
inflation expectations of consumers. 
The tariffs also have the potential to make fourth-quarter sales for Christmas less certain.  
If consumers begin to see shortages of some items and price increases on other items, they may 
very well defer some Christmas shopping.  If consumers perceive tariffs as a temporary tax 
increase, they may choose to defer some purchases until the tariff dispute is resolved.  In this 
case, this would not affect underlying demand for consumer goods, but it may well shift the 
timing of purchases and, thus, make it more difficult to read the signal in Q4 of this year’s GDP 
and Q1 of next year’s real GDP. 
Given the difficulties in seasonal adjustments we have seen for the quarters straddling 
year-end, this could complicate our interpretation of year-end data.  Similarly, we may see some 
firms defer investment spending should those investment outlays require significant components 
that are currently being tariffed, with the expectation of making the investment once the tariffs 
are removed. 
It is fortunate that the tariff disputes have not left a bigger mark on financial markets to 
date.  One might argue that some of the movement in the 10-year Treasury rate, which has 
increased since the previous FOMC meeting, is consistent with firms’ greater ability to pass on 
September 25–26, 2018
28 of 153


 
 
 
price increases.  However, I would have expected the tariff announcements, the stress in many 
emerging markets, the possibility of a more significant slowdown in China, and a well-
anticipated rate increase to have left a greater imprint on financial markets.  Instead, these 
disruptions have been accompanied by new highs in the U.S. stock market.  However, if some of 
these events start more clearly affecting economic data in coming months, I would think there is 
a possibility of more reaction in financial markets over time. 
Despite the uncertainty with tariffs, I continue to see a relatively strong economy 
resulting in further tightening of labor markets.  However, I do not see quite as much momentum 
in the economy as is assumed in the Tealbook.  As a result, my forecast of the unemployment 
rate does not fall as far as the unemployment rate forecast in the Tealbook.  As labor markets 
tighten, I expect the upward trend in wages to continue, with some further modest increase in 
inflation. 
I assume that we will continue to increase interest rates gradually, with one increase per 
quarter through 2019.  This gradual interest rate path reduces the risk that we slow down the 
economy too much, as might occur with a steeper interest rate path, or result in an inflation rate 
modestly higher than in the Tealbook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The economy in the Fourth District continues to 
expand at a moderate pace.  The September reading of the Cleveland Fed staff’s diffusion index, 
which measures the difference in the percentage of business contacts reporting better versus 
worse conditions, was 30, essentially unchanged from July.  Firms remain optimistic, with about 
40 percent expecting conditions to improve in the next several months. 
September 25–26, 2018
29 of 153


 
 
 
Construction, both residential and nonresidential, is the one sector in which activity has 
softened this month from recent high levels.  A few contacts attributed this softening in part to 
price increases, especially in the case of higher-end homes.  Contacts view the slowdown as 
temporary and foresee moderate real GDP growth.  
District labor market conditions remain strong.  Year-over-year growth in payrolls moved 
up to 1.4 percent in July.  And over the past three months, job growth has been at its highest pace 
since early 2016 and is well above the Cleveland staff’s estimate of the District’s longer-run 
trend. 
The District’s unemployment rate was 4.4 percent in July, near its lowest level since the 
early 2000s and more than ½ percentage point below the Cleveland staff’s current estimate of the 
District’s natural rate of une.mployment.  Now more than half of the District contacts are 
reporting their demand for workers is outstripping available supply, and these reports come from 
a variety of industries, across skill levels, and from across the District. 
The Cleveland staff conducted a special survey to determine how firms were handling the 
shortages.  More than half of the respondents said they were planning to raise wages, and, of 
these, more than half said they planned to raise wages by at least 5 percent.  Only a few firms are 
changing benefits to attract workers, but many are offering more flexible work schedules and 
arrangements.  In addition, several firms are easing or eliminating drug screenings for jobs for 
which they see minimal risk. 
Inflation pressures in the District continue to rise.  The Cleveland staff’s diffusion index 
of nonlabor input costs has been rising since the middle of last year.  Reports of rising input costs 
were widespread among manufacturers and builders, with almost 80 percent of manufacturers 
and 70 percent of builders reporting increases in recent weeks. 
September 25–26, 2018
30 of 153


 
 
 
Many cited the tariffs on steel, aluminum, and lumber as the primary cause but also noted 
that stronger demand for these inputs was causing cost increases.  The Cleveland bank staff’s 
diffusion index of prices received is near a multiyear high, with almost half of contacts reporting 
raising their own prices in the past two months.  And, as President Rosengren also reported, firm 
contacts have said that the tariffs have given them an opportunity to raise their own prices. 
With regard to the national economy, my outlook is little changed since our previous 
meeting, but I have edged up my real GDP growth projection and edged down my 
unemployment rate forecast since my June SEP submission.  Incoming data are consistent with 
strong underlying economic fundamentals.  Personal income continues to rise as the labor market 
continues to strengthen.  Household balance sheets are sound.  In fact, the recent data revisions 
raise the level of disposable income and the saving rate from what was previously thought.  I 
expect an expansionary fiscal policy to add to real GDP growth over the next couple of years. 
Financial conditions remain accommodative despite the gradual path of rate increases the 
Committee has put in place.  As indicated in the Tealbook, lending terms and standards have 
eased in many markets, mitigating some of the effects of higher interest rates, although higher 
mortgage rates, as well as rising house prices, have led to a slowdown in housing-sector activity 
this year. 
Now, some slowdown in the pace of real GDP growth in the third quarter was expected, 
following the significant pickup in growth in the second quarter.  But both consumption and 
business investment remain strong.  Indeed, despite uncertainty about trade and tariff policies, 
consumers and businesses are quite optimistic.  This suggests there is more underlying 
momentum in the economy than I had thought.  So I’m projecting growth will be above trend 
September 25–26, 2018
31 of 153


 
 
 
over the 2018 to 2020 period, a tad over 3 percent this year, and gradually declining to my 
estimate of the trend pace, of 2 percent, in 2021. 
Labor markets continue to tighten.  Payroll gains have averaged over 200,000 jobs per 
month this year, up from about 180,000 jobs per month last year and well above most estimates 
of trend growth.  The unemployment rate has been below 4 percent since April.  Across a range 
of measures, there is less slack in the labor market than at the peak of the previous expansion.  
Anecdotal reports of wage increases are widespread, and the aggregate measures of wages have 
accelerated this year. 
In my SEP submission, above-trend real GDP growth would be associated with further 
tightening in the labor market, with the unemployment rate near 3½ percent over the next three 
years and well below my 4½ percent estimate of its longer-run level.  I expect some further 
appreciation in wages, but not to levels seen in previous expansions, unless we see a pickup in 
the low productivity growth we’ve experienced over this expansion. 
The inflation news remains positive.  The rates of both headline and core PCE inflation 
are at our longer-run goal of 2 percent.  Now, although inflation readings will vary from month 
to month, I expect by year-end to be able to say that inflation is sustainably at our 2 percent goal.  
Inflation expectations are well anchored near target.  The five-year, five-year-forward 
expectation, as measured by the Cleveland Fed model, has been steady at 2.2 percent for the past 
five months, and other survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations remain stable. 
With the economy strong, long-run inflation expectations well anchored, and appropriate 
monetary policy, I am projecting that over the forecast horizon inflation will remain near 
2 percent, modulated by the usual monthly variations in the data.  I view the risks to my forecast 
conditioned on appropriate monetary policy as broadly balanced.  We’re at a point in the 
September 25–26, 2018
32 of 153


 
 
 
business cycle when increased attention to financial stability risk is warranted, because the 
economy continues to grow above trend while financial conditions remain quite accommodative. 
Asset valuations and equity are elevated above historical norms, even accounting for the 
low level of interest rates and lower tax rates, and corporate bond spreads are relatively low.  
Commercial real estate valuations continue to be “lofty,” and leveraged lending is growing.  
Indeed, the value of institutional leveraged loans has risen 20 percent over the past year and now 
exceeds the total value of the high-yield bond market.  Asset quality metrics for bank-reported 
leveraged loans have not deteriorated, but underwriting standards are loosening. 
Nonbanks—into which we have less insight—play a larger role in the market.  Estimates 
indicate that CLOs now buy about half of new leveraged loans, and a recent appeals court ruling 
exempted CLOs from Dodd-Frank risk-retention rules; this ruling may encourage more issuance. 
In addition, financial stresses are increasing in some emerging market economies.  So far, 
these appear to be confined mainly to Argentina and Turkey, reflecting their macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities related to low levels of reserves, large current account deficits, and reliance on 
external funding.  However, should there be contagion to other emerging market economies, it 
could eventually feed back to the U.S. economy through financial market channels and trade 
linkages.  Also, continued divergence between growth and the policy rate paths in the United 
States and those abroad could put further upward pressure on the dollar—something that poses a 
downside risk to U.S. real GDP growth and inflation. 
The economic outcomes in my projections are conditional on appropriate policy.  And 
based on my outlook and assessment of risk, my policy rate path includes further federal funds 
rate increases this year and next, with the policy rate holding at a level somewhat above my 
longer-run estimate of 3 percent before starting to decline in 2021.  In my view, this path will 
September 25–26, 2018
33 of 153


 
 
 
sustain the expansion, prudently balancing the risk to the outlook for both parts of our dual 
mandate, and help control rising risks of financial imbalances. 
The median policy rate path in the set of simple monetary policy rules posted on the 
Cleveland Fed website has the funds rate rising to about 3½ percent in the fourth quarter of next 
year, just a tad shallower than my appropriate path.  Now, I note that the policy rate path in the 
Tealbook is quite a bit steeper than my path and the median path in the SEP, but the economic 
outcomes in these forecasts are similar.  Of course, there are uncertainties regarding the 
appropriate policy rate path, and the difference between these paths is within the 70 percent 
confidence band based on historical forecast areas. 
Still, it got me thinking—and I fear to tread here, but I’m going to anyway—about the 
possible differences between our reaction functions.  So I asked Ed Knotek, who is sitting over 
there, to estimate what types of policy rules would fit the median SEP numbers.  In particular, 
suppose the SEP participants were using an inertial Taylor-type rule as in the Tealbook, with an 
r*-intercept term, an inertial coefficient, and the inflation gap and unemployment gap as 
arguments on the right-hand side.  What would the coefficients in that rule have to look like for it 
to fit the SEP data? 
So Ed’s estimates indicate that if we impose longer-run SEP values for r* and U*, then 
the rule would be a bit less inertial than the Tealbook baseline rule.  But the main difference 
stems from the weights on the unemployment gap and the inflation gap.  The SEP rule puts little 
weight on the unemployment gap and a high weight on the inflation gap.  In other words, the 
median Committee participant is less inclined than the Tealbook’s baseline to react to the 
undershoot of unemployment.  As the Tealbook’s rule is a fairly reasonable description of past 
policy behavior, this analysis suggests that the Committee is planning to react differently to 
September 25–26, 2018
34 of 153


 
 
 
incoming data than we have in the past.  I think this is worth understanding and at least presents 
a caution to us. 
Of course, there are ways to reconcile the behavior and the paths.  Our estimate of U* 
could be lowered, thereby narrowing the unemployment gap.  If the SEP path remained the same, 
then the rule estimated with the new data would look more like the Tealbook’s, or our r* could 
be raised, which, all else being equal, would raise the SEP path, bringing it closer to the 
Tealbook’s. 
We know that estimates of the longer-run normal level of the funds rate are subject to 
considerable uncertainty.  Indeed, the recent NIPA revisions, though relatively small, revised up 
the r* estimate obtained from the Laubach-Williams model from about 0 percent to nearly 1 
percent.  In other words, based on this estimate, a neutral policy has been more accommodative 
than we have thought.  This may help explain some of the strength in the economy, and it also 
lends support for further rate increases, which we will discuss tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m very happy to be third today, because I 
sensed some themes similar to those identified by those who went before, although not the 
insightful analysis that President Mester just gave on the reaction functions. 
Reports received from my directors and other contacts were similar to those in the 
previous round.  Activity is robust, and businesses are optimistic about their near-term prospects.  
An exception, of course, is their continued consternation over trade policy.  A couple of large 
manufacturers complained that the steel and other tariffs already in place are costing them a lot 
of money.  They expect the fallout to only worsen in 2019 unless there is a breakthrough in trade 
negotiations. 
September 25–26, 2018
35 of 153


 
 
 
I also continue to hear some firms saying that they have put plans for major new 
investments on hold until there is more certainty about trade policy.  Still, no one is saying they 
are canceling projects that were already under way or reducing other spending. 
The most interesting comments I heard this round were about the different ways 
companies are responding to tight labor markets.  A large temporary employment firm told us 
that with relatively high churn rates in the United States, it continues to be possible to find 
workers, and that more of their clients are willing to pay up to do so. 
I heard about a different experience at a recent outreach event I participated in at Fort 
Wayne, Indiana.  I visited an e-commerce musical equipment retailer.  They have studio 
equipment, guitars.  You can find them online very easily.  The company described some 
innovative benefits and workplace amenities they use to attract workers from all parts of the 
country.  That’s the interesting part.  Nearly half of their 1,400 employees are transplants from 
outside their Indiana/Michigan/Ohio regional labor market. 
Another story:  A major equipment manufacturer told me they have started a concerted 
effort to train their lower-skilled workers to move up the internal job ladder.  Though this takes 
time, they see it as a lower-cost way to fill skilled positions than bidding for experienced, trained 
workers, and they can identify the best workers in those jobs already.  Other firms, however, are 
delaying projects or turning away business.  A major electric utility noted that they are slowing 
construction work on the East Coast because of labor shortages.  And we continue to hear a 
number of reports about shortages of truck drivers despite substantial increases in wages. 
In another sign of tightening labor markets, one of my directors, who is a retired union 
leader, noted that workers appear emboldened to make wage and work rule demands that would 
not have been possible a short time ago. 
September 25–26, 2018
36 of 153


 
 
 
Regarding the national outlook, clearly, the economy has considerable momentum, and 
we’re looking for GDP growth in the second half of 2018 to run at about 3¼ percent.  As we 
move through the forecast period, we project that tighter monetary policy and waning fiscal 
stimulus will steadily reduce growth to about 1½ percent by 2021.  This is roughly ½ percentage 
point below what we think potential output growth will be at that time. 
We expect unemployment to drop to just under 3½ percent by the end of next year and 
then slowly edge up to 3.7 percent by the end of the projection period.  This is about 
½ percentage point below our estimate of its natural rate.  A modestly restrictive monetary policy 
should close the remaining gap within two to three years beyond the forecast horizon. 
With regard to inflation, I feel more comfortable about the outlook than I did for the June 
SEP.  The post-benchmark revision data show year-over-year core inflation running steadily near 
target since March and a number of our statistical indicator models are now coalescing near 
2 percent.  But some downside risks remain.  Notably, I still think we have a ways to go before 
we can be confident that inflation expectations have firmed symmetrically around 2 percent. 
As we look forward, our projected path of resource utilization should boost inflation by 
0.1 or 0.2 percentage points, even with a flat Phillips curve, and a gradual path of rate increases 
should help firm inflation expectations.  Our projection has core PCE inflation rising to 2.2 
percent in 2020 and remaining at that level in 2021.  This is up 0.1 percentage points or so from 
our June SEP submission.  There is no reason to be concerned about such a modest overshooting 
of our inflation target.  Indeed, it may be needed to move inflation expectations symmetrically 
and sustainably around 2 percent. 
September 25–26, 2018
37 of 153


 
 
 
In sum, I think the gradual, data-dependent path that monetary policy is on right now is 
appropriate.  This should generate the soft landing we are looking for, and that shows through in 
my economic forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Acting President Gould. 
MR. GOULD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Once again, it’s an honor to be here, and it’s a 
particular treat to be here with our incoming president, Mary Daly. 
The national economy remains in excellent shape, and we’re certainly seeing this strength 
in the 12th District economy.  Consumers have been spending at such a brisk clip that my 
contacts in the shipping industry are having trouble keeping up with the growth in online sales.  
And, despite any bad press you may hear about tech companies these days, I can assure you that 
Silicon Valley is doing just fine.  One contact tells me that the overall environment for venture 
capital activity there is the healthiest he’s seen at any time in a 37-year career. 
These conditions are reflected in my SEP contribution, with a projected expansion of real 
GDP that will further outstrip the economy’s potential.  Our estimate of the natural rate of 
unemployment is unchanged at 4.6 percent, and we expect the observed rate to bottom out at 
about 3.4 percent next year.  Our estimate of trend growth is also unchanged for now, at 1.7 
percent, with actual growth slated to far exceed that this year and remain above trend next year.  
Finally, our projection includes a slight inflation overshoot over the next year or two, in line with 
continued tightening in labor markets. 
A few factors can temper this strong expansion; they mostly revolve around the 
international outlook.  The prospect of an escalating trade war is creating uncertainty, causing 
some West Coast businesses to proactively formulate costly contingency plans and, in a few 
September 25–26, 2018
38 of 153


 
 
 
cases, delay expansion decisions.  For now, though, direct effects on the District economy have 
been quite limited. 
More generally, I view the overall risks to real GDP growth and inflation as being largely 
balanced.  New analyses by my staff illustrate this balance in the case of inflation.  They find that 
the recent upward movement in core PCE inflation has largely been driven by products whose 
prices don’t move with the business cycle.  By contrast, the contribution of cyclically responsive 
categories has been steady.  So their analysis attributes the recent inflation pickup mostly to 
idiosyncratic factors.  This raises a downside risk that the pickup will be reversed. 
On the upside, we could see a greater response of the cyclically sensitive components to 
further labor market tightening.  Along those lines, some of my contacts have started noticing a 
reawakening of long-dormant pricing power, echoing comments made by President Rosengren.  
For instance, a manufacturer of outdoor consumer products recently commented on a newfound 
ability to pass increases in material costs on to retail prices.  On balance, the weight of the 
evidence indicates that inflation could still move in either direction, though, relative to our target. 
Finally, one change in my SEP is an increase in the estimated neutral funds rate for 
nominal R*.  This revision takes into account a few factors likely pushing it upward—for 
instance, the higher federal deficit and lower corporate taxes.  It also acknowledges recent trends 
in the data, as reflected in the updated estimates drawn from a wide range of models.  We 
bumped the San Francisco Fed’s estimated neutral rate up from 2.5 percent to 2.75 percent.  This 
remains toward the lower end of the range of existing estimates, implying significant headroom 
between it and the current funds rate.  Accordingly, my SEP includes two more funds rate 
increases this year and further gradual increases in 2019.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
September 25–26, 2018
39 of 153


 
 
 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The national economy has evolved roughly as we 
expected since our previous meeting.  We still see GDP growth well above estimates of trend.  
The labor market continues its strength.  Inflation has been at our target, and inflation 
expectations have been stable. 
I think confidence matters for continued momentum in the real economy in the period 
ahead.  Both business and consumer sentiment seem strong, consistent with low unemployment, 
growth in consumption, buoyant markets, and expansionary fiscal policy.  We see this reflected 
both in national numbers and our Fifth District surveys.  Over the past four months, for example, 
our manufacturing survey composite index hit its highest values in its 25-year history. 
It has been a tough month for our District, however, as Hurricane Florence has killed 
millions of farm animals and upended the lives and destroyed the property of thousands of 
people.  Our hearts go out to them.  The area most affected was not that densely populated, but it 
will still take some time for rural North Carolina, in particular, to get back on its feet. 
We continue to dig into the trade question, and it looks like it may well be settling toward 
a focus on China.  I would agree with the staff that the limited tariffs actually imposed to date 
have not had much effect on the overall economy.  Nevertheless, they have meaningfully 
affected the particular industries in which tariffs have been imposed.  I sat with a group of 
farmers who complained that the trade talks were playing a game with their livelihoods at a time 
when strong agricultural yields had already forced prices down.  One consequence that we might 
see is food prices contributing to a near-term underrun of overall inflation, relative to core 
inflation. 
Uncertainty about the permanence of eventual tariffs is still limiting supply chain 
reconfiguration, but we do see firms moving when they face competitors with a supply chain that 
September 25–26, 2018
40 of 153


 
 
 
is less damaged by tariffs.  This will hurt China.  This has happened, for example, with a 
furniture retailer and a plumbing distributor in our District.  Each has moved its supply to 
Vietnam to stay competitive with firms that already manufacture there. 
More broadly, uncertainty, I believe, may be limiting our upside.  Considering the health 
of the economy, I would expect businesses to be investing more than they tell me they are.  
When you probe for the reasons for their seeming underinvestment, they point to the tariff 
discussions, as President Evans said, and the effect on their confidence in the future 
environment. 
Finally, I get the impression received from contacts that current trade policy talks have 
already affected the perceived reliability of the United States as a global supplier.  This 
reputation has been important in sustaining our strong trade relationships over time, but there are 
signs that that dynamic is starting to reverse.  A major poultry company that is not meaningfully 
tariffed told me they see nontariff countries moving supply to diversify away from 
overconcentration with the United States, as we no longer seem as reliable as we once did.  A 
defense contractor told me the same thing.  Any such invisible diversification is absolutely 
something that we need to keep an eye on. 
When I joined the Committee in January, there was some debate about whether inflation 
still needed a push by keeping rates lower for longer.  I’m comfortable saying, as others have 
said, that inflation has firmed and expectations are stable.  Now the main question for us is, how 
close is the economy to overheating? 
As the Chairman said at the Jackson Hole symposium, in a world of anchored inflation 
expectations, we may well see overheating in different ways.  We often discuss financial 
excesses.  For example, our Board of Directors has pushed us on the topic of commercial real 
September 25–26, 2018
41 of 153


 
 
 
estate.  But I’d also like to emphasize that we should be looking hard at supply constraints, and 
I’m starting to see signs that supply constraints are increasing among contacts in our District. 
Close to home, my research staff tells me driver shortages are causing school bus delays 
in multiple districts.  Service in Richmond restaurants is on a notable decline.  Even I’ve noticed 
that.  [Laughter]  We’re seeing concerns about employee availability as a drag on investment.  A 
steel contact told us a plant wasn’t built because of those concerns.  The plumbing distributor I 
mentioned earlier said suppliers are not bringing jobs back to the United States because they 
can’t see building a plant if they can’t become confident they can hire workers.  For employers 
who don’t believe they can raise prices enough to offset increased wages, we’re starting to see 
them choose to forgo business.  A construction firm told us it is turning down work, and two 
defense contractors are imposing delays on their customers.  Trucking shortages are everywhere.  
A Maryland crab meat processor and a set of soybean farmers report production shortages 
because they can’t get seasonal immigrant workers, and a chicken plant actually reduced the 
number of shifts because of inability to find workers. 
Now, I don’t think I’m ready to call the overheating question quite yet.  As I said earlier, 
despite all these indications of unusually high resource utilization, our contacts report that capital 
expenditure plans for next year are only moderate to conservative, and we continue to see strong 
employment growth, perhaps as people come in from the sidelines. 
But I will say I’m watching supply constraints closely, and, now that quits are back to 
2000 levels and nominal wage growth has ticked up, I’m watching compensation as well.  Just 
ahead of us is the annual merit increase period, and, like others have said, I’m hearing talk of 
larger-than-normal across-the-board increases.  So 2019 could be interesting.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
September 25–26, 2018
42 of 153


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The U.S. economy is growing at a healthy 
pace, around 3 percent on a year-over-year basis.  This pace is considered robust today.  But in 
historical U.S. data, it would be considered average. 
District contacts largely confirm that they also saw healthy growth rates in their 
businesses during the intermeeting period, although perhaps slightly off pace earlier this year.  
Trade issues continue to be a focal point of conversation.  Labor markets continue to perform 
well.  One concern is that interest-sensitive residential investment is set to be a drag on growth 
this year, and this bears careful monitoring. 
While both the national economy and the Eighth District economy seem generally robust, 
the Committee’s monetary policy strategy for the coming periodcontinues to be a cause for 
concern, from my perspective.  A look at the graphs on page 3 of Tealbook A indicates why.  For 
real GDP, industrial production, the unemployment rate, and consumer prices, the Tealbook 
baseline is similar to projections made by private-sector forecasters.  But when it comes to short-
term interest rates, the Tealbook forecast is approximately 100 basis points higher than the Blue 
Chip median and well outside even the Blue Chip 10 highest forecasts at the end of 2019. 
The private-sector forecasters seem to believe that we can get the same outcomes for real 
activity and inflation with a much shallower path of the policy rate over the next 15 months.  The 
Tealbook baseline, as well as perhaps much of the SEP, is based on the inertial version of the 
Taylor (1999) policy rule.  While this policy rule may have served us as a good benchmark in the 
past, I do not think it is serving us well today, as it seems to have been designed for an economy 
that’s very different from the one operating today. 
Fortunately, the Tealbook also provides alternatives to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule that 
can make more sense of today’s macroeconomic environment.  I think the Committee should 
September 25–26, 2018
43 of 153


 
 
 
begin to put considerably more weight on these alternatives very soon, because, in my view, the 
consequences of following versions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule will be unnecessarily 
increasing recession risk in an environment with very little inflation pressure. 
Let me briefly describe the two alternatives that I find compelling in the “Monetary 
Policy Strategies” section of Tealbook A.  One is a flexible price-level targeting rule.  Price-level 
targeting is known to be an optimal monetary policy strategy in some versions of New 
Keynesian macroeconomic models—the workhorse model in the research literature.  Such a rule 
would endeavor to maintain the Committee’s 2 percent inflation target, on average, over a period 
of several years.  Because the Committee has missed the target on the low side since 2011, the 
flexible price-level targeting rule calls for inflation slightly in excess of the 2 percent target for 
several years. 
The Tealbook simulation gives us some idea of the quantitative magnitudes involved in 
such a strategy.  The results on page 102 of Tealbook A are striking.  The policy rate would 
essentially be unchanged from its current level during 2019 and 2020, and yet inflation would 
average only about 2¼ percent—in my opinion, within measurement error of the Committee’s 
2 percent target.  This could be a very successful strategy, should the Committee adopt it. 
For those worried about an outbreak of inflation to the upside in such a scenario, the 
Committee can continue closely monitoring TIPS-based expected inflation measures, adjusted 
from a CPI to a PCE basis.  Those measures currently suggest that the Committee will not 
achieve the inflation target on a PCE basis over the next five years.  But should inflation 
expectations move up, the Committee could adjust appropriately. 
Another aspect of the Committee’s current monetary policy strategy is that while PCE 
inflation is now about at target, the unemployment rate is below estimates of the natural rate, as 
September 25–26, 2018
44 of 153


 
 
 
discussed by David Wilcox in his earlier presentation.  The current strategy, at least inside our 
models, aims to reduce inflationary pressure by increasing the unemployment rate back up to the 
estimated natural rate.  I am doubtful that, with today’s flat Phillips curve, it is really necessary 
or desirable to attempt to raise the unemployment rate by 90 basis points. 
The Tealbook optimal control simulation with asymmetric loss seems to bear out some of 
my intuition on this subject.  In this exercise, the loss function for the optimal control calculation 
puts positive weight on unemployment above the natural rate but no weight on unemployment 
below the natural rate.  In other words, we do not like unemployment being high—but when 
unemployment is low, everyone is happy.  Some of this feeds into the comments by President 
Mester and the Ed Knotek SEP policy rule, which puts less weight on the unemployment gap. 
Another way to say this is that strict inflation targeting is a better policy today than it 
would be in an environment with high unemployment.  I think this sort of objective is a better 
description of what this Committee is trying to achieve.  Page 104 of the Tealbook describes the 
outcomes under this scenario.  The policy rate stays relatively flat, inflation remains at the 
2 percent target, and unemployment remains low. 
It seems to me that this sort of simulation—which is, after all, using our own model of 
the economy—has profound implications for how the Committee should, as it proceeds, 
approach monetary policy strategy.  I encourage the Committee to consider these findings in 
coming deliberations.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  So why don’t we take a break now for coffee?  And 
we’ll reconvene at four o’clock, according to this clock right here.  [Laughter]  Ignore that other 
clock.  Thank you. 
[Coffee break] 
September 25–26, 2018
45 of 153


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  Let’s get going again.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I found President Mester’s reveal on the 
policy rule implicit in the FOMC path particularly interesting.  In our Board discussions, I, too, 
have been wrestling with the persistently large gap between the SEP and Tealbook baseline 
policy rate paths and the sharp contrast with the quite similar paths of our unemployment growth 
and inflation projections.  President Mester’s insight that the Committee appears to be putting a 
lot more weight on keeping inflation at target than on the undershoot of the unemployment rate 
seems intuitively very appealing, and it also connects nicely to David’s earlier explanation of the 
yield-curve inversion in the Tealbook baseline due to policy working a lot harder to get 
unemployment back up to the natural rate. 
Like many of you, I expect the economy to continue exhibiting strength into next year, 
based on its considerable underlying momentum as well as the sizable deficit-financed fiscal 
support in the pipeline and easy domestic financial conditions.  That said, there are meaningful 
risks on both sides of the economy’s most likely path. 
The staff currently forecasts that, following very strong growth in the second quarter, real 
GDP will increase 3 percent at an annual rate in the second half of this year, with consumption 
and business fixed investment expected to post solid gains. 
The strength of domestic demand is manifest in the labor market.  We’ve seen payroll 
gains so far this year at about 200,000 per month, well above estimates of the pace necessary to 
absorb new entrants.  The share of the prime-age population that is working has risen nearly 
1 percentage point over the past year and now stands above 79 percent, suggesting the tight labor 
market is providing employment opportunities to more Americans, including among racial and 
demographic groups who traditionally have experienced labor market outcomes below the 
September 25–26, 2018
46 of 153


 
 
 
national average.  Even with those gains, the share of the prime-age population that’s employed 
is still below its previous cyclical peak, suggesting there may be room for some further gains. 
In another positive development, the year-on-year increase in average hourly earnings 
reached its highest level since the depth of the financial crisis, and the employment cost index 
has shown a similar acceleration.  Even with this factor present, nominal wage growth remains 
moderate by historical standards.  Although there’s anecdotal evidence of worker shortages in 
some sectors and regions, there’s no evidence yet of rapid acceleration in aggregate wage 
indicators. 
Recent data on inflation have likewise been encouraging, providing little signal of an 
outbreak to the upside, on the one hand, and some reassurance that underlying trend information 
may be moving closer to 2 percent, on the other.  These developments give me some confidence 
we’ll see underlying trend inflation move back up to 2 percent over time.  After various 
measures of underlying trend inflation came in below our 2 percent objective over several years, 
it’s important that we sustainably achieve inflation around 2 percent, to prevent an erosion of the 
underlying trend rate the next time the economy faces a downturn and the federal funds rate hits 
its lower limit. 
I’m saddened to note that some communities have seen devastating losses associated with 
Hurricane Florence, with many lives lost and countless others badly disrupted.  Despite the 
magnitude of the destruction, however, the staff estimates that the imprint on overall real GDP 
this quarter will be fairly modest, in part because of the timing of the storm. 
More broadly, the fiscal stimulus in the pipeline on top of strong underlying growth 
momentum should continue to provide a considerable boost.  According to CBO and Joint 
Committee on Taxation estimates, deficit-financed stimulus is projected to amount to nearly a 
September 25–26, 2018
47 of 153


 
 
 
full percentage point of GDP this year, over 2 percentage points next year, and 1½ percentage 
points the following year.  That is a heck of a lot of stimulus, especially at this point in an 
expansion. 
These considerable tailwinds are occurring at a time of very accommodative financial 
conditions, which further bolster the outlook.  Since we began the tightening cycle, financial 
conditions have remained highly accommodative, according to most of the major indexes.  Since 
our previous meeting, equity prices are up about 4 percent, diverging from movements in the 
opposite direction in some other major economies.  That boost has been offset by a modest 
increase in the 10-year Treasury yield and a 1 percent appreciation in the broad dollar, leaving 
financial conditions little changed, on net, during the intermeeting period. 
With fiscal and financial tailwinds reinforcing the strong underlying domestic momentum 
in the economy, we can expect further tightening in resource utilization, starting from already 
high levels.  The August unemployment rate was about ½ percentage point lower than the 
previous year.  If unemployment continues to decline at the same rate as we saw over the past 
year, we’ll soon see unemployment rates not seen since the 1960s.  Historically, in the few 
periods when resource utilization has been at similarly tight levels, we’ve tended to see elevated 
risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances.  And, in fact, in the most recent 
episodes, the signs of overheating have not showed up in inflation, but rather in financial-sector 
imbalances. 
After the sustained period of historically low interest rates that we’ve experienced, 
special vigilance is warranted.  And, as was stated earlier, the staff’s latest assessment suggests 
that financial vulnerabilities are indeed building, especially in the corporate sector, in which low 
September 25–26, 2018
48 of 153


 
 
 
spreads and loosening credit terms are mirrored by rising indebtedness.  And we’re also seeing 
leveraged lending once again on the rise, with low spreads and loosening terms. 
While rising stimulus and accommodative financial conditions present some upside risks, 
recent foreign and trade developments present risks on the other side.  Real GDP growth in 
Europe has moderated from its strong pace of last year, and there are some political risks that 
bear watching, such as Italy’s budget negotiations and the looming Brexit deadline. 
As U.S. real growth has pulled away from foreign real growth, in part reflecting fiscal 
policy divergence, expectations of monetary policy divergence have strengthened, contributing 
to upward pressure on the dollar earlier this year.  The resulting currency adjustments are 
compounding challenges faced by some emerging market economies, along with a complicated 
and unpredictable trade environment and gradually increasing interest rates.  Although capital 
flow reversals have been contained to several notably vulnerable countries so far, there’s some 
risk that we could see a broader pullback. 
As has been widely commented on, changes in trade policy present some uncertainty.  
Analysis by the Board’s staff andby outside analysts finds little evidence of an effect in 
aggregate inflation, investment, or consumption data.  Equity prices have moved in response to 
news about trade policy, but these movements generally appear to be short-lived, and, in the case 
of the United States, are outweighed by positive expectations overall.  If there were some further 
broadening of tariffs both here and abroad at a moderate level, we might see something that 
looked like a supply shock, but it’s not obvious it would have implications for monetary policy. 
In the extreme, we could see financial stress spillovers if trade disputes trigger a broader 
bout of instability associated with China.  Before the imposition of trade measures, China was 
embarked on a policy course oriented toward deleveraging and gradual deceleration while 
September 25–26, 2018
49 of 153


 
 
 
continuing to manage capital flows and the exchange rate.  Deteriorating trade relations could 
greatly complicate those policy challenges, so there is some risk of destabilizing currency 
dynamics and associated financial spillovers. 
Finally, because of the important role of temporarily elevated federal spending, I do see 
some risks associated with the uncertainty regarding the fiscal trajectory a few years out, 
especially if this comes around the same time that underlying momentum in the domestic 
economy is losing steam.  The Tealbook projection is formed on a number of assumptions that 
smooth through that risk while also ensuring debt sustainability.  A less benign path is an 
important risk, and market participants may be looking for clues in upcoming election outcomes. 
But, for now, strong growth and the tailwinds that are likely to continue boosting the 
economy over the next year or two have important implications for monetary policy, and I look 
forward to discussing them tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles.   
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to sound a little bit like a broken 
record, because I haven’t changed my outlook much since we last met or, indeed, really all that 
very much since the first time I participated in this meeting almost a year ago, and certainly not 
since early this year. 
My SEP submission from the beginning of the year is virtually the same as the one I 
submitted for this meeting.  I had a relatively optimistic forecast of U.S. real GDP growth when 
2018 began, and the economy’s performance has more or less confirmed that outlook.  And 
while the staff outlook has caught up for 2018, I am more bullish for 2019 and beyond, although 
even there the staff outlook is moving in the correct direction.  [Laughter] 
September 25–26, 2018
50 of 153


 
 
 
One factor underpinning my outlook has been my optimism regarding the economy’s 
growth potential.  That’s been importantly premised on the implications of increased business 
investment.  And we’ve been seeing that for some time.  Higher investment, obviously, will 
increase the nation’s capital stock, nudge up productivity growth, as new technologies and 
methods of production have an opportunity to be put into practice. 
Now, that pickup in investment predated the tax bill, so I don’t think that it is entirely an 
evanescent result of a sugar high.  But there’s every reason to think that it will be extended and 
deepened by the incentives that were included in the tax reform bill, and so far the data are 
encouraging.  Real business fixed investment jumped 10 percent in the first half of this year, the 
fastest pace in six years—but, again, continuing a pickup that had begun over a year before the 
passage of the tax bill—and leading indicators of capital spending are strong. 
Because of my optimism on potential, I think that strong growth outlook is consistent 
with continued moderate inflation pressures.  Certainly, up to this point, inflation hasn’t been 
sending a strong signal of an economy that’s at capacity.  Wages have been picking up 
somewhat.  They’re still well below pre-crisis growth rates.  And, as a wise man has said, there’s 
a lot to like about that. 
As I’ve also said before, another component of my outlook that helps reconcile strong 
growth and low inflation is an assessment—which I think is shared by many of you—that the 
labor market likely has more slack than might be apparent from a straight read of the 
unemployment rate.  In particular, the current strong economy, the strong labor market, will pull 
more people into, or keep more people from leaving, the labor force.  This is pushing up the 
labor force participation rate relative to its current still-depressed level.  And, again, it would be 
September 25–26, 2018
51 of 153


 
 
 
anomalous if the incentives stemming from the tax bill didn’t extend and deepen this effect, 
although it is not driven principally by the tax incentives. 
In this regard, I like the box in Tealbook A on the sources of strong employment growth 
that laid out a plausible scenario—to me, still a relatively conservative one—for an upward tilt in 
the labor force participation rate in the period ahead. 
Now, although that baseline forecast is upbeat and unchanged, not chasing the needles, I 
do think we have to keep an eye on some emerging risks.  They’ve been mentioned by a number 
of people already.  One, as Joe noted in his presentation: stresses in some emerging markets have 
increased.  So far, the effect has been fairly contained, limited to the most vulnerable countries, 
Turkey and Argentina.  But it’s not going to be terribly surprising if, as we raise interest rates 
further, emerging market stresses become more widespread and remain an issue.  Tighter 
monetary policy in the United States has never been a particularly good thing from the point of 
view of emerging markets.  Now, certainly, tighter policy in the context of strong growth is less 
of a bad thing than if we had tightened in response to inflation concerns.  It would certainly be 
worse even for the emerging markets that are affected if we were to get behind the curve in the 
United States and, therefore, have to steepen our policy response in the future as a result of 
having flattened it now.  Overall, the best thing we can do is to be clear and consistent in our 
communications and gradual in our policy.  But still, the effect of this on the rest of the world, 
and particularly emerging markets, is something that we need to continue to monitor. 
And, second, as I think almost everyone has mentioned, trade tensions present a risk, 
although, again, as discussed earlier by Joe, the effects don’t appear to be very large or 
discernible in the data currently, apart from uncertainty being very high—but uncertainty means 
exactly that.  Markets and economic actors are generally projecting that there is a material 
September 25–26, 2018
52 of 153


 
 
 
chance that the outcome of all of this mudwrestling will be the resolution of some long-standing 
irritants, with a still strongly open trading system, which has always been in the long-term 
interest of the United States. 
We should keep a careful watch for signs either that the tariffs are having more 
consequential effects than the fairly slight adjustments that the staff has currently built into the 
outlook or that the path of this process is leading this uncertainty to resolve itself in a belief that 
we would not be ultimately tending toward a more open economy.  And I think that the 
consequences of that on sentiment and the substantive consequences of that would be much more 
consequential for economic growth.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Well, thank you very much.  And before I jump into the outlook go-
round, just let me say a few words.  It’s really a distinct honor and personal privilege to join this 
Committee and to begin to participate with all of you in formulating U.S. monetary policy.  I’ve 
been a student of this institution for 35 years, and like any student, I have things to learn, but I 
look forward to learning from you and working with you in the meetings ahead.  And, again, it’s 
a thrill to be here.  So thank you. 
The U.S. economy—in particular, the labor market—had been surprising on the upside 
for nearly two years.  It’s impossible to know with any precision how much of this is really due 
to a durable uptick in trend growth and a fall in the rate of structural unemployment or perhaps is 
the result of some combination of good luck, animal spirits, some fiscal stimulus, or just plain 
noise in the data that may soon mean-revert. 
But my personal view—which, of course, I’m willing to update as the new data come 
in—is that the economy may indeed have hit bottom on trend growth several years ago, and that 
September 25–26, 2018
53 of 153


 
 
 
U* may be somewhat lower than I would have thought at that time.  But, of course, let me 
acknowledge that my uncertainty about those key parameters is elevated relative to the past 
20 years. 
I’m going to talk a little bit about the labor market.  On the labor market, we’re seeing a 
late-cycle rise in real wages, and that’s typical in an economy that’s operating in the vicinity of 
full employment.  And we’re starting to see that in the data, as several of you have mentioned.  
And, certainly, I’m glad to see that.  I’ve done a little work looking at the past data, and in the 
past several cycles when we’ve seen this late-cycle rise in real wages, it was not accompanied by 
a material increase in core inflation but was absorbed through a decline in profit margins.  And 
we actually saw that decline in the profit share and rise in the wages share. 
Now, of course, that’s the past.  And, importantly, in those previous cycles, monetary 
policy was aimed at achieving a desirable inflation outcome.  But it did occur in that mix, as I 
said.  So I think, in addition to looking at the focus on prime-age labor force participation—as 
many of us do—as a swing factor that may extend the expansion, how the unemployment rate, 
which has been declining, and wages and profit margins play out will be an important thing to 
follow.  And I’ll talk a little bit more about that. 
Piggybacking off something that Dave Wilcox said, my own analysis suggests that a 
simple productivity-adjusted wage Phillips curve relationship has remained relatively stable over 
the past couple of decades.  This suggests to me that the inflation outlook—to the extent we 
continue to have a strong labor market, as we’re projecting—is really going to depend upon how 
this balances out between wages and profits and the pass-through of that to inflation. 
Let me talk a little bit about the durability of the expansion.  And I would note a 
substantial recent upward revision to the household savings rate, which was reported in the BEA 
September 25–26, 2018
54 of 153


 
 
 
data in July.  With the revised data, the household savings rate stands at 6.6 percent, which is 
several percentage points above where the BEA thought it was before the revision.  And that 
suggests to me that, in the aggregate, households are not stretched, and that continuing gains 
from a healthy labor market are likely to continue to support consumption.  
But as many of you, I’m sure, know, at this comparable stage of the previous cycle, 
households were cutting the savings rate to sustain consumption growth.  It fell to a revised 
2.2 percent.  I think, in the original data, it was actually zero or negative, but it did get revised 
up.  We’ve also seen, in the past couple of years, some pickup in measured productivity growth, 
albeit from a very depressed pace, and as one of you mentioned, this has coincided with the 
rebound in nonresidential investment.  In both the 2001–07 cycle and the 1982–90 expansion, 
productivity actually began to trend down in the late stages of that cycle.  And, of course, in the 
1990s, we saw the opposite pattern.  Of course, recent changes in the tax code have favored 
investment, and the capital deepening that we’re seeing will need to continue if the gains in 
productivity are to be sustained.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 11th District economy continues to be 
strong.  Texas job growth year-to-date is in excess of 3½ percent, annualized.  Our broad surveys 
across the board are strong.  The one sticking point, which a number of you have mentioned, is 
that the manufacturing uncertainty index is higher due primarily to concerns regarding trade and 
tariffs.  We do think this is having, among manufacturers, a chilling effect on their capital 
expenditure considerations, and I’ll mention more about that in a moment. 
We’ve been struck since the previous meeting about reports of broader strength of the 
U.S. consumer among retailers.  A few months ago, if you talked to a mall operator in the United 
September 25–26, 2018
55 of 153


 
 
 
States—many of them domiciled in Texas but operating nationwide—they would have told you 
that unless you had a Tesla and an Apple store in your mall, as well as a number of high-end 
luxury stores, sales for your mall were going to be down.  Since that previous meeting, these 
operators have indicated that consumer strength is now across a much broader range of stores 
than they’ve seen earlier in the year, and they believe that this indicates an increased willingness 
of consumers across a broader range of incomes to step up their purchases.  Mall owners are also 
increasingly citing labor shortages across their constituent stores as a key issue in their malls. 
A broader range of manufacturing contacts are suggesting a need and an ability, as a 
number of you have mentioned, to raise prices in response to higher labor costs as well as higher 
input costs generally.  And, certainly, they are more confident about the ability to make those 
price increases stick. 
Consumer business contacts, on the other hand, are also suggesting higher labor and input 
costs that have been, at least to us in our discussions with our contacts, much more cautious and 
doubtful, mainly because of competitive pressures, about their ability to pass on those cost 
increases to their customers.  All comment on continued labor shortages and a focus on spending 
more in technology in order to mitigate labor cost and availability pressures.  Contacts continue 
to report a desire for greater scale in order to protect margins—and this is the margin-share 
erosion that Governor Clarida was just talking about—and, so, many more of our contacts are 
continuing to focus on their ability to afford increased technology spending.  And they cite easy 
access to capital to fund merger transactions as a key factor in their strategic thinking. 
Regarding wage pressures, we certainly see them intensifying at the low end—that is, 
$10 to $15 per hour—and certainly for skilled workers.  We still think the picture is a little more 
mixed in the middle.  And when I say “middle,” I mean those workers who are making $20 to 
September 25–26, 2018
56 of 153


 
 
 
$25 per hour with benefits.  Discussions with business contacts suggest that these workers in the 
middle are highly focused on the quality of their employer and the sustainability of their job—
particularly in the event of the next downturn—and other benefits, such as training, paid leave, 
vacation time, stock options, as well as promotion opportunities that come with working with a 
larger company.  This causes us to think that big companies have got a greater ability to cope 
with a tight labor market than smaller companies, but we’re continuing to explore this. 
In response to tariffs and threatened tariffs, an increasing number of our contacts are 
telling us they’re actively discussing reorganizing their supply chains.  They’re also actively 
rethinking their product offerings and, in some cases, reclassifying product offerings in order to 
manage around potential tariffs.  They emphasize, though, that this may not mean bringing 
manufacturing to the United States, but instead means moving the manufacturing most likely to 
other Asian countries that are not the subject of tariff discussions.  Executives are taking a wait-
and-see approach but are getting more ready to take action.  And each of them emphasizes a 
focus on global competitiveness, which, again, they emphasize will probably not mean bringing 
operations back to the United States. 
And so we’ll see how this all shakes out on the tariff front, but we think it could be just as 
likely that people will more aggressively pursue other countries around the world in order to 
maintain global competitiveness.  And many of them are assuming that, five years from now, the 
policies of the United States government may be different from today’s policies, and they are 
loath to make moves that may look good for a few years but actually mean they are not globally 
competitive over the longer horizon.  So we are struck by those conversations. 
We recently held, with the Kansas City Fed, our third annual energy conference.  The 
conference reinforced our view that the world is increasingly reliant on shale oil growth in order 
September 25–26, 2018
57 of 153


 
 
 
to meet global demand growth, and it’s very likely, as we’ve said before, because of the rapid-
decline curve of shale and the lack of long-lived projects for the past several years in the United 
States and infrastructure and labor constraints, that shale will struggle to keep up with global 
demand growth. 
Tariffs on aluminum and steel are making these constraints worse, particularly by making 
it more expensive and possibly delaying pipeline capacity out of the Permian Basin.  Again, as 
we’ve said before, we believe we’re in relative supply–demand balance globally—with 
increasing vulnerability, though, to supply outages as a result of geopolitical events—as we’re 
seeing right now with Iran and the Iran sanctions.  We certainly expect more price volatility in 
the months and years to come. 
Finally, our Dallas Fed economists continue to believe the fiscal stimulus is having a 
substantial effect on GDP growth in 2018.  But, as many of you also point out, we believe it will 
fade somewhat in 2019 and further in 2020.  And this is all reflected in our SEP submission. 
We are cognizant that fiscal stimulus may be temporarily masking the negative effects of 
aging demographics and sluggish productivity growth that is at least in part due to lagging 
educational and skill levels of our workforce.  We are cognizant that monetary policy acts with a 
lag; that is, we may not see the effects of our current removals of accommodation until sometime 
in 2019, just as fiscal stimulus is continuing to fade.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, the Third District 
has experienced what I would characterize as modest growth.  Labor markets appear healthy, 
while services and manufacturing were on solid footing, and consumer spending has firmed.  The 
only sector that is not performing well is residential investment.  And I’ll come back to that. 
September 25–26, 2018
58 of 153


 
 
 
Employment growth has picked up, with two new casinos in Atlantic City adding 
measurably to job growth there.  The unemployment rate ticked down by 10 basis points in both 
July and August and now stands in the District at 4.1 percent.  Sectors that show particular 
strength were professional and business services and education and health care.  But I want to 
give one example of, I think, the broad-based strength of the job market in the Third District.  A 
snack food manufacturer in Lancaster County reported that they are paying $17 an hour with 
benefits for someone to take pretzels off the line and put them in a box.  And you get some sense 
now of how tight that market is if they can’t find people to do that job.  Thus, I think our regional 
labor market is looking more and more like that of the nation. 
Manufacturing in the region is performing well.  Our manufacturing surveys showed a 
significant bounceback in activity in September, and the current conditions index once again 
exceeds its nonrecessionary average.  Of interest was a decline in the inflation measures, both 
current and expected, from their elevated August level.  Many respondents indicated that 
business activity was especially healthy, but—a point many have already voiced—there are also 
concerns over tariffs.  By and large, manufacturers remain quite optimistic, expressing intentions 
to increase hiring over the next six months as well as to make additional capital expenditures. 
One diverse manufacturer in our District indicated that the rest of this year would see 
exceptionally strong growth, but that there were some concerns coming on the horizon.  Growth 
in demand from Europe has slowed, and North American sales, while healthy, are no longer 
accelerating.  Only Asia is booming, especially for this firm, particularly in products related to 
AI and AI server farms.  The server demand in China, he said, is off the charts, according to this 
contact, and he just can’t meet the demand.  However, tariffs are becoming a source of concern, 
and he is a bit nervous that some of the strong demand this year was from buying goods forward, 
September 25–26, 2018
59 of 153


 
 
 
ahead of the tariffs.  If that’s the case, he was very concerned that activity could reverse quite 
quickly. 
Another manufacturer mentioned that they’re in the process of moving some of their 
supply chain from China to South Korea; this echoes the comments previously reported today.  
And a banking contact indicated that a number of firms that bank with them have decided to 
delay some of their planned capital expenditures because of concern over trade. 
Anecdotes of this nature indicate that firms are acting in response to the actual and 
proposed tariffs, and their behavior may—and I emphasize “may”—eventually show through to 
the data. 
Further strength in our region was reported by a number of bankers whose loan growth 
hit double digits, and that growth was occurring across their loan portfolios.  Retail activity in the 
Third District continued to grow modestly in both July and August, and August auto sales were 
the highest for the year.  Our service-sector survey shows increased activity in employment, and 
the employment index hit a new record high.  Consumers in the region, like those in the nation, 
remain very optimistic. 
The only sector that is not experiencing much in the way of growth is residential real 
estate.  Permits for single-family homes remain flat for the year, as does the value of residential 
contracts.  With the exception of the Philadelphia metro area, house prices are appreciating very 
gradually. 
Now, some of the weakness appears to be driven by supply constraints, as a house 
remains on the market for an amazingly short time and inventories are very low and declining.  
In addition, contacts mention the lack of building lots as a future constraint on residential 
investment.  In fact, they said, “You know, we weren’t doing the work of getting those permitted 
September 25–26, 2018
60 of 153


 
 
 
during the recession, and now we’re concerned that we just don’t have those lots in place.”  This 
is particularly true in areas like Lehigh Valley, Pennsylvania, in which the housing market is 
extremely “hot.” 
To sum up, the economic activity in the Third District is improving and broad based, and 
we continue to hear anecdotes of wage and price pressures.  However, as I said, there’s growing 
concern over tariffs. 
My view of the national economy is generally similar to that of the Board staff.  My 
unemployment rate forecast is slightly different, envisioning a trough about 3.5 percent next year 
before seeing a gradual rise to 3.9 percent by the end of the forecast horizon.  Also, our forecast 
of real GDP growth levels off at 2 percent in 2020 and 2021.  However, my funds rate path is 
much shallower.  I anticipate one more rate hike this year to be accomplished at this meeting and 
perhaps two more in each of 2020 and 2021, bringing the funds rate to 3.13 percent, which is in 
line with my medium-term view of its neutral level.  I’ll elaborate on why I believe this in our 
policy go-round tomorrow. 
For now, I’ll summarize the Philadelphia region’s growing optimism by stating one very 
simple fact:  Carson Wentz is back.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The most recent economic data show the 
10th District has been growing faster than the nation, and our business contacts other than in 
agriculture remain very optimistic.  District employment is currently growing about as fast as at 
any time in the past 20 years, with unemployment in the region at its lowest level since 2000.  
Hourly wage growth is around 4 percent, and some contacts report that nonwage compensation is 
pushing up labor costs.  Although business contacts expect to expand hiring over the next six 
September 25–26, 2018
61 of 153


 
 
 
months, we are beginning to hear reports of labor supply constraints impeding business 
expansion. 
Despite a positive outlook overall, two-thirds of the firms in our surveys report negative 
effects due to tariffs, although, as others have noted, such effects have yet to show up in the data.  
Exports in the District through July actually increased year-over-year in every category except 
for farm and food products, which were down about 8 percent on last year. 
Regarding energy and agricultural activity in the District, drilling activity continued to 
expand, along with the number of oil rigs over the past three months.  The ag sector, on the other 
hand, has remained relatively weak in the third quarter.  Corn and soybean prices have remained 
low after dropping substantially this summer, alongside intensifying trade disputes.  Soybean 
producers in particular have felt the effects of a 25 percent Chinese tariff.  The announcement 
this month of a new government assistance program largely aimed at these producers could 
offset lost income by more than one-third, and losses could be further mitigated for farmers who 
sold their 2018 crops earlier in the season.  But the storyline for agriculture over the past several 
years remains the same.  Even with the assistance of this new government program, incomes in 
the farm sector are expected to remain low in the months ahead. 
As for the national economy, my outlook is little changed since our previous meeting.  I 
continue to expect above-trend real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020, with growth returning to its 
trend rate in 2021, an unemployment rate at 3.4 percent, and inflation remaining near 2.  My 
view of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is somewhat lower than in the June SEP, 
due to my assumption for the broad exchange rate of the dollar and its implications for growth 
and inflation.  I expect solid consumption growth in the third quarter, and wage growth appears 
to be well positioned to support consumer spending over the medium term.  Household balance 
September 25–26, 2018
62 of 153


 
 
 
sheets remain strong, and measures of consumer confidence are also at their highest level since 
the 2000s.  And more households are reporting that their financial situations have improved 
compared with a year ago.  Increased momentum in spending and the strengthening financial 
situation of households support a forecast of above-trend growth this year and next. 
The labor market continues to tighten, with the unemployment rate well below my 
assessment of its longer-run level.  Job openings hit a new record high and outnumbered the 
unemployed for the fifth consecutive month.  Workers seem increasingly confident about their 
job prospects.  Further evidence comes from the Kansas City Fed’s Labor Market Conditions 
Index.  For the fifth consecutive month, the rise in voluntary unemployment made the strongest 
contribution in this index to the improvement in the level of activity.  Notably, the share of the 
unemployed who left their jobs voluntarily and immediately began searching for their next job is 
at its highest level since 2000. 
Consistent with the tight labor market conditions, measures of wage growth have 
increased moderately.  Average hourly earnings of private-sector employees rose compared with 
a year ago, and the employment cost index, which controls for compositional shifts in jobs, also 
increased year-over-year.  Although nominal wage growth has increased, corporate profits have 
remained strong in the past several years.  And, as in the experience of the late 1990s, rising 
labor cost measures do not yet appear to be squeezing profit margins. 
I expect year-over-year inflation to remain near 2 percent this year, in line with the 
economy’s solid fundamentals, with upside risk over the medium term as labor markets continue 
to tighten and the economy continues to grow above its trend rate.  On the other hand, further 
strengthening of the dollar poses a downside risk to my inflation forecast.  In particular, flight-to-
safety flows from emerging market assets into dollar-denominated assets could lead to further 
September 25–26, 2018
63 of 153


 
 
 
appreciation of the dollar and put downward pressure on inflation, as highlighted in the staff’s 
analysis and Tealbook A’s “Risks and Uncertainty” section. 
Finally, I continue to view the outlook as roughly balanced.  On the upside, 
accommodative financial conditions, elevated consumer confidence, and expansionary fiscal 
policy could lead to further increases in real growth.  And on the downside, trade policy 
uncertainty, growing risk in emerging market economies, and policy divergence between the 
United States and other advanced economies could weigh on both foreign and U.S. real GDP 
growth.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming economic data on the real side 
of the economy have come in stronger than I had written into my June SEP submission, and I 
find myself once again revising my current-year growth forecast upward.  The central question I 
am now wrestling with is whether the apparent strength in GDP and job growth is a signal that I 
have materially underestimated the underlying momentum of aggregate demand.  If that is the 
case, the elevated potential for overheating would require a more aggressive approach to raising 
rates than what I had been thinking. 
As is typical when data interpretation has become challenging, I have been leaning 
heavily on my network of business contacts and directors to glean some useful signals on the 
likely forward path of the economy.  Sentiment among directors and contacts remained largely 
positive this cycle, with the majority reporting that demand roughly matched or was slightly 
above expectations.  Although reports reflected an uptick in the pace of activity since the start of 
the summer, my contacts generally indicated that their outlooks for the remainder of 2018 and 
2019 have not been materially changed.  This is especially true regarding expectations of future 
September 25–26, 2018
64 of 153


 
 
 
investment spending.  With few exceptions, firms in my District have maintained their previous 
capital investment plans and are not expecting a significant increase in cap-ex spending over the 
next year or so. 
My staff and I pressed our contacts to explain why the recent upbeat economic news is 
not stimulating a greater appetite for capital expenditure, especially against the backdrop of 
recent tax reform and fiscal stimulus.  As usual, the responses were varied.  But they had one 
unifying theme:  Businesses’ investment strategies are driven by demand fundamentals.  In the 
current environment, business leaders in the Sixth District have not yet bought into a significant, 
persistent pickup in demand over and above their current capacities to meet that demand.  
Capacity constraints are an issue in some cases, particularly with respect to labor, but businesses 
in general are not yet in the mindset to take on aggressive expansion plans in the face of what 
they perceive as continued substantial uncertainties. 
On this front, consistent with previous cycles, uncertainty regarding tariffs and trade 
policy remains a feature of the economic landscape.  And I did hear a few concerns related to the 
outcome of the upcoming elections.  However, I am getting the sense that business leaders have 
become inured to the seemingly endless string of day-to-day fluctuations in the business 
environment—so much so that it is damping their reactions to good news as well.  To quote one 
of my directors, “The chaos we are now experiencing is becoming customary.”  And, like 
President Kaplan reported, this view is cementing a “status quo” perspective. 
With regard to the consumer, I have taken on board some of the pickup in household 
spending and have nudged up my 2019 real GDP growth forecast accordingly.  Indeed, the latest 
consumer confidence numbers, which came in quite strong, suggest a vigorous consumer who 
has a robust demand for goods.  However, I think it is noteworthy that much of the recent 
September 25–26, 2018
65 of 153


 
 
 
strength in consumer spending has not been in goods that are associated with longer-term 
commitments, such as autos and large appliances.  A reasonable interpretation of this behavior is 
that households are exercising prudence, not wanting to take big, irreversible bets.  And it is in 
this context that I view the substantial revision to the personal savings rate.  Despite high levels 
of sentiment, households—like businesses—appear to be continuing forward with caution.  In 
light of these reports, I am largely holding on to my previous growth narrative for the time being.  
I find that these non-euphoric outlooks of business and the consumer—both of which seem to be 
decidedly free of irrational exuberance—give me a degree of comfort.  That said, I do see the 
risks as being tilted to the upside.  Should consumer spending hew to a higher growth trajectory, 
I suspect that would prompt firms to respond by ratcheting up investment spending. 
While the translation of the August CPI and PPI data suggests a soft core PCE inflation 
number, I see retail prices continuing to increase at about a 2 percent rate.  But here, too, I view 
the risks to that projection as being tilted to the upside.  Consistent with aggregate measures of 
wage growth, reports received from my District suggest some firming in labor costs.  A growing 
number of firms across the District report an uptick in merit increases, and these increases have 
been occurring for a number of cycles, with merit averages reported in the range of 3 to 3½ 
percent.  The formerly dominant 2 to 2½ percent range is now the exception.  But perhaps the 
biggest shift in contact and director sentiment this cycle concerned input cost increases and price 
pressures.  As noted by President Rosengren initially but by many others around this table, there 
has been a marked increase in the reported ability to pass on cost increases.  In the Sixth District, 
this was especially true for firms subject to tariff- and freight-related cost increases.  Those firms 
reported little to no “pushback” when passing along the rising costs to their customers.  But I get 
the sense that the phenomenon is becoming more widespread. 
September 25–26, 2018
66 of 153


 
 
 
So, returning to my initial question—whether GDP and job growth strength signals 
stronger momentum of aggregate demand than I have expected—the sense I have today is “yes,” 
but not by an appreciable amount.  So my out-year projections are not changing all that much.  
But this is today.  We heard clearly that business stands ready to respond quickly if demand 
strengthens significantly, and this reality will motivate my monitoring of the economy in coming 
weeks. 
Finally, I want to echo concerns raised by President Mester and Governor Brainard 
regarding the increase in leveraged lending, particularly in the nonbank sector.  I am hearing 
concerns about this from an increasing number of people in the market and am starting to share 
their fear that rising risk here may introduce systemic concerns.  I encourage more discussion of 
this at future meetings.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Moderate growth continues in the Ninth 
District.  Almost all sectors report to be doing well, with the notable exception of the agricultural 
sector, in which international demand for crops is down sharply and many producers are blaming 
the tariffs, as others have noted.  A regional survey of HR professionals in our region said that 
about 40 percent of firms claim to be adding to headcount.  About two-thirds are describing the 
labor market as very tight.  Firms say that they are expecting some pickup in wage growth.  
There appears to be moderate price pressure at the wholesale level, with less at the retail level.  
And manufacturing is strong, but, again, there are heightened concerns about tariffs. 
For the national economy, so far there is little evidence of a slowdown after the strong 
growth in Q2.  Pickup in growth this year is in part attributable to the fiscal stimulus.  However, 
the stimulus, importantly, does not appear to be showing up in inflation expectations.  It does 
September 25–26, 2018
67 of 153


 
 
 
seem that the stimulus is boosting supply via increased investment, and that itself should not be 
necessarily inflationary.  It could be increasing our economy’s capacity, which would be a good 
thing. 
In the labor market, strong job growth continues.  Nonfarm payroll is still rising at about 
200,000 a month.  However, as others have noted, labor force participation has edged up further, 
but prime-age LFP is still about 1 percentage point below pre-recession levels.  Wage growth has 
edged up a little bit, and that is welcome.  But unit labor costs are rising at less than 2 percent, so 
wage growth is still a drag on inflation. 
As for prices, core PCE inflation is now at 2 percent on a yearly basis.  This is a 
milestone; I welcome it.  And inflation expectations appear to be solidly anchored—not moving 
up much, maybe somewhat less than 2 percent, but certainly not climbing above 2 percent. 
With regard to financial markets, we discussed the yield curve.  David gave a nice 
presentation today.  I am still concerned about the yield curve.  It remains pretty flat.  It’s still 
flashing yellow as a warning signal. Again, I’m not focused on the causation between the yield 
curve necessarily and the real economy, but, to me, it is giving us feedback about the state of 
monetary policy. 
I am taking some comfort that long-term rates have moved up a little bit lately, and 
maybe it is giving us a little bit more room.  It may reflect more optimism about long-term 
growth prospects, under the stable inflation expectations.  If long-term rates continue to move 
up, I will be less concerned about the SEP path, in which we raise the policy rate.  And while this 
is all happening, the stock market continues to outperform, which is a confident signal. 
Regarding threats to the outlook, risks seem to have increased, as others have noted.  The 
trade war with China seems to be heightening.  There is emerging market turbulence in 
September 25–26, 2018
68 of 153


 
 
 
Argentina and Turkey that we’re all monitoring and a general slowdown outside the United 
States.  But the domestic fiscal stimulus appears to be having a larger upside effect than I, at 
least, had expected a year or so ago. 
So, in summary, we have reached our inflation target, which I think is very positive.  
Let’s hope we can stay there.  Ongoing strong job growth, coupled with modest wage growth, 
suggests that we may still not have reached full employment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  During the break, Jeremy 
Rudd handed me a note that I thought I’d share with you.  This was actually a reminder that the 
great Benjamin Strong, the first president of the New York Fed, kept in his desk at all times.  
And the note said:  “To the Governor of this Bank.”  And I’ll paraphrase to shorten it:  “Never 
forget that this Bank was created to serve in the interest of the country as a whole,” which is a 
great reminder.  I, too, left a note at my desk when I left the San Francisco Fed.  And that note 
said, “Don’t mess with my estimate of r*.”  [Laughter]  That had, apparently, no effect.  
[Laughter] 
Okay, moving along—incoming data have confirmed my positive assessment of the U.S. 
economic outlook.  Growth in the first half of the year was a surprise to the upside, and with 
support given by fiscal stimulus and still-favorable financial conditions, growth should remain 
strong for the remainder of this year and through 2019.  And in a reassuring development after 
the disinflation scare of last year, inflation appears to be settling in at our 2 percent longer-run 
objective.  So no matter how you cut it, this is a very good macroeconomic situation. 
Now, despite the Chair’s plea at the Jackson Hole symposium not to be overly 
“starstruck,” I find it useful to gauge the economy’s strength relative to the benchmarks of 
September 25–26, 2018
69 of 153


 
 
 
underlying trends.  And, through that lens, things continue to be strikingly strong.  Even with the 
labor market already reaching or even surpassing most measures of full employment, job growth 
has averaged over 190,000 jobs per month over the past six months, and that’s roughly double 
the 75,000 to 100,000 job estimates of trend labor supply growth.  And with no signs of 
significant slowing on the horizon, I expect real GDP growth to come in around 3 percent this 
year and 2½ percent next year, well above my estimate of potential growth of 1¾ percent.  And 
with sustained above-trend growth ahead, I perceive the unemployment rate edging down 
slightly below 3½ percent next year, significantly below my estimate of the natural rate of 
unemployment at 4.5 percent.  And if that happens, that would be the lowest unemployment rate 
we’ve seen in nearly 50 years. 
I’d also mention this Conference Board survey that came out today.  And, you know, I 
follow this jobs availability index very closely.  We’ve seen a steady increase in this measure of 
labor market strength, and today we saw the strongest reading on that that we’ve seen in 
17 years—again, an independent confirmation, beyond the unemployment rate, of how at least 
employees are feeling or households are feeling about the labor market. 
Although recent data have been very cooperative in terms of building confidence in my 
baseline projection, one large surprise was a substantial upward revision of the personal saving 
rate in the comprehensive revision to the national accounts.  So I’m going to pick up on a theme 
that was mentioned by Governor Clarida and President Bostic.  For example, the personal saving 
rate for the first quarter of this year was revised up from 3.3 percent to 7.2 percent, and although 
the saving rate is prone to sizable revisions, this was, in the parlance of statistics, a “whopper” of 
a revision.  [Laughter]  The level of the personal saving rate now looks quite high in light of the 
very elevated level of household net worth.  One possible interpretation is that consumers have 
September 25–26, 2018
70 of 153


 
 
 
oversaved and may be on the verge of a spending spree, which would give an added boost to an 
already “hot” economy. 
Now, although this is conceivable, there are alternative explanations for the persistently 
high level of household saving that suggest that consumers may not be about to shop till they 
drop.  One is rising income and wealth inequality, which implies a lower propensity to spend out 
of wealth.  More generally, the surprisingly high saving rate in the context of high asset values 
may just be another manifestation of the very low r* environment we’re in.  All else being equal, 
a low value of r* implies elevated asset prices relative to historical norms.  If this increase in 
asset prices only reflects a change in the discount rate rather than fundamentally stronger 
economic prospects, then consumers should, in theory, not increase spending in response.  Thus, 
the apparent twin puzzles of sky-high asset prices and high personal saving may not be puzzles at 
all.  And my “takeaway” is that a sustained high saving rate is mostly not a precursor to a surge 
in consumer spending. 
For inflation, the data have been favorable.  Measures of wage growth, the missing piece 
of the puzzle over the past few years, have moved up somewhat, in an encouraging sign.  
Underlying measures of price inflation over the past 12 months, whether you look at the core rate 
or the trimmed mean, came in at 2.0 percent in July.  And despite the very strong labor market 
and the pickup in wage growth, there’s little if any evidence of substantial inflation pressures 
building in the U.S. economy.  I see this as reflecting countervailing forces.  The strong economy 
will likely push up inflation in the nontraded domestic sector, such as services, but 
underwhelming growth in the rest of the world points to a somewhat stronger dollar and softer 
import prices, which will provide a partial offset.  Of course, the relatively subdued inflation 
pressures, despite a very strong economy, are a testament to the importance of well-anchored 
September 25–26, 2018
71 of 153


 
 
 
inflation expectations—a lesson we must not forget.  Taking all of this in, I envision only a 
modest overshoot of inflation vis a vis the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective over the 
next few years, with core inflation peaking at around 2¼ percent. 
And I see the risks to the outlook as balanced.  Now, I can list, as others have, the usual 
suspects:  emerging market contagion; Brexit—which I’m not sure was mentioned yet, but I 
would highlight that; trade wars; high-end rising asset prices; elevated debt and risk in the 
nonfinancial sector; and the list goes on and on.  What stands out to me in the comments by 
financial market participants is an overriding sense that things will work out, and that the 
“grownups in the room” will take care of things before they get out of hand.  And you definitely 
hear this tone regarding Brexit.  Now, this may well turn out to be the case, and I hope so.  But, 
to my ear, the tone of this commentary borders on complacency—and that is worrisome. 
The lessons I take away from comments by financial market participants are, one, that 
they may be unprepared for disappointment.  In the event of a surprise, we could see a sharp 
negative reaction as a result.  And, two, we ourselves must guard against this type of 
complacency.  I’ll reserve my remarks on policy till tomorrow.  In terms of my projection, I 
penciled in gradual rate increases over the next two years, resulting in a funds rate target range 
that eventually lies moderately above my long-run estimate, which stands firmly at 2½ percent.  I 
am participant number 10 in the Summary of Economic Projections.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks to everyone for really a very 
interesting and thoughtful round of comments.  There is, indeed, a lot to like about this economy 
right now.  Growth is strong, the labor market is strong, and inflation is finally around our target.  
So I’m happy to join in what seems to be a widely held view around the table that these 
September 25–26, 2018
72 of 153


 
 
 
favorable conditions are likely to persist.  Overall, this is a particularly positive moment for our 
economy.  And I continue to see the risks to this outlook as roughly balanced. 
To start with, both the staff projections and our SEP submissions show an upward 
revision for growth to a bit above 3 percent this year, and that increase is well supported by 
incoming data.  With fiscal stimulus likely to support demand at least into 2020, as well as solid 
fundamentals for consumers and businesses, growth seems likely to remain strong this year and 
then gradually slow as we continue to scale back policy accommodation and as the demand-side 
effects of fiscal stimulus work their way into the economy.  Solid consumer spending reflects 
healthy household balance sheets and confidence readings as well as the state of the labor 
market.  Payroll and employment growth in July and August continued well above trend labor 
force growth.  Various aggregate measures of wage and compensation growth are showing some 
acceleration and are now clustered around 3 percent, a full percentage point above their levels of 
five years ago. 
These wage gains and many other indicators suggest that we’re in the neighborhood of 
full employment, although so far I see no clear signs that the economy is overheating.  Strong job 
growth is likely to drive the unemployment rate a bit lower, as forecasts generally predict, but 
further sideways movements in labor force participation could moderate the expected reduction 
in unemployment—as has happened so far.  There’s also room for further gains in participation 
by prime-age males, as some mentioned around the table, which remains meaningfully below its 
pre-crisis level.  This suggests to me that, at least in the aggregate, the labor market may still 
have a bit of room to run.  Data through July show headline PCE inflation running at 2.3 percent 
and core PCE inflation at 2.0 percent.  Core has been close to 2 percent since March, and the 
September 25–26, 2018
73 of 153


 
 
 
August CPI reading suggests just a tick down from these levels.  This is very welcome, and we 
need to see more of it to meet our symmetric inflation target on a sustained basis. 
As for the risks—and these have all been touched upon to one degree or another—in 
contrast to our strong performance here at home, growth abroad has generally fallen short of 
expectations, particularly in the emerging markets, and as the year has progressed, we’re hearing 
less talk of a synchronized global expansion and more talk of divergence between U.S. output 
growth and growth elsewhere.  With respect to the emerging markets, for now the financial 
markets are differentiating between the most troubled countries, which are primarily facing 
homegrown challenges, and other emerging market countries with better fundamentals.  But I do 
agree with the view expressed by many around the table that we need to be on the lookout for 
signs of broader turmoil. 
I would also agree that, for now, it looks like we’re going to be—for an extended period, 
probably—in an unsettled environment regarding trade negotiations, and that that will be the new 
normal.  The risks here are very difficult to evaluate, and at the very least, these issues are 
probably adding some fragility to the economic backdrop at the moment.  It’s striking the extent 
to which, around the table, people raised labor market constraints and other supply-side 
constraints and also improved belief—a higher belief on the part of companies and their ability 
to pass through cost increases, wage increases into prices.  We don’t see it yet in the aggregate 
data, and it’s not in the forecast.  It’s not in anybody’s forecast—which I guess is why we think 
of it as a risk—but it’s clearly something that we’ll have to be keeping an eye on. 
John said it very well about Brexit.  When the vote came through, in the immediate 
aftermath and since then, it has really been hard to conjure up a scenario that would have 
represented a significant macroeconomic risk.  And I think they’re on their way to managing to 
September 25–26, 2018
74 of 153


 
 
 
create such a scenario, perhaps.  [Laughter]  High uncertainty, with big gaps to fill in the 
negotiations.  You know, we know that U.S. banks are, in theory, ready for this; but this is so 
unprecedented.  If it really is a hard Brexit, then we’re just going to have to live with some 
uncertainty. 
Okay.  So let me conclude, then, with a couple of thoughts about the path forward.  And 
for this purpose, I’m going to ask us to assume that, for the moment, the economy, the global 
geopolitical situation, the balance of risks, and financial conditions also continue to evolve about 
as we expect them to over the next year or so.  And on that path, the further gradual increases in 
the federal funds rate that are envisioned in our draft statement—assuming we move forward 
with it tomorrow—will soon bring the federal funds rate into the broad zone of our estimates of 
the neutral rate sometime during the middle part of next year. 
And at that point and between now and then, we’re going to face challenging questions 
about how far to raise the federal funds rate and at what speed.  So, as we move into 2019, and 
assuming we do stay on this path, I see us as feeling our way forward, listening carefully to what 
the economy and the financial markets are telling us about the state of the economy and the 
outlook. 
At any given point, the question will be whether our policy setting is appropriate to 
sustain the expansion, maximum employment, and inflation around 2 percent.  So, in this 
thinking, the location of one’s point estimate of the neutral rate is a factor to consider, but it’s 
only one factor.  As we all know, our estimates of the neutral rate are highly uncertain, and we 
would do well to focus on what the economy and the markets are telling us about the appropriate 
degree of accommodation.  For example, if we were to reach my personal estimate of r*, but, 
let’s say, the economy is still growing well above trend, job growth remains strong, inflation is at 
September 25–26, 2018
75 of 153


 
 
 
or above target, inflation pressures are building, I’d be inclined to continue rate increases, as I 
imagine many of us would.  I might also be tempted to raise my estimate of r*.  On the other 
hand, if the economy weakens or if financial conditions tighten sharply, we can adjust the path of 
policy appropriately.  Inflation shows no signs of accelerating, and I don’t have a sense today 
that we need to be in a hurry to tighten policy or that we are in danger of falling behind the curve 
in containing inflation pressures. 
So, to wrap up, anticipating tomorrow’s discussion, with generally favorable conditions 
at home and the risks to the outlook roughly balanced, I see a strong case for a 25 basis point 
increase in the target range at this meeting.  The market fully expects that, and the proximity to 
our goals seems to me to warrant it.  So, again, thank you for this round of comments, and why 
don’t we go ahead and proceed with Thomas’s monetary policy briefing and Q&A before we 
break for the reception and dinner. 
MR. LAUBACH.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 
The draft of alternative B includes an increase in the target range for the federal 
funds rate and continues to note the Committee’s expectation of further gradual 
increases in the target range.  The upper-left panel summarizes the rationale for the 
key change that alternative B makes to the statement language.  By removing the 
second sentence of paragraph 3 from the statement, the FOMC would position itself 
for further increases in the federal funds rate target as appropriate without having to 
characterize the stance of monetary policy.  You may view eliminating the need for 
such an assessment as desirable at a time when the federal funds rate has reached the 
lower end of the range of your estimates of its longer-run normal level—especially in 
light of the substantial uncertainty attending such estimates.  In the early stages of 
normalization, it was appropriate to underline the message that monetary policy 
remained accommodative even as you began raising the federal funds rate.  
Reflecting that accommodation, the economy has continued to strengthen.  But as the 
federal funds rate has moved up and the effects of asset purchases have been waning, 
assessments of the policy stance have become more uncertain. 
Assuming that the “accommodative” language is removed from the statement at 
this meeting, your public communications may become less focused on where the 
 
5 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
September 25–26, 2018
76 of 153


 
 
 
federal funds rate stands in relation to the neutral rate.  Nevertheless, the Summary of 
Economic Projections will continue to convey views on the extent to which 
participants see a need to raise the federal funds rate temporarily above its longer-run 
normal value.  In your September projections, almost all of you are expecting that, 
sometime over the next three years, it will be appropriate for the federal funds rate to 
move at least modestly above your individual assessments of its longer-run level.  
One interpretation of this feature is that the shorter-run neutral rate will, for a while, 
exceed the longer-run normal value, reflecting in particular the effects of fiscal 
stimulus.  An alternative, complementary interpretation is that you perceive a need for 
the federal funds rate to move above neutral to forestall inflationary pressures or 
incipient financial imbalances that could result from a prolonged period of high 
resource utilization. 
As noted in the upper-right panel, the level of the longer-run neutral rate will 
unavoidably have a bearing on the path of the federal funds rate.  For example, some 
of you may directly use your estimate of the longer-run level in deciding on 
appropriate policy, as would be the case with a standard Taylor-type rule.  Others of 
you may prefer to gear your changes in the policy rate to the observed changes in goal 
variables, as in the spirit of a first-difference rule.  Here, too, the neutral rate is 
influencing policy, but it is doing so more indirectly because it affects economic 
outcomes.  In any case, real-time assessments of the neutral rate are uncertain, and 
examining market-based measures of the longer-run neutral rate can serve as a 
crosscheck on your own estimates.  In addition, investors’ views on the longer-run 
neutral rate have substantial implications for asset pricing and financial conditions 
more broadly. 
The following three panels, which draw on Andrew Meldrum’s briefing to the 
Board last week, present estimates of the federal funds rate in the longer run from 
three sources:  The Treasury yield curve, the Blue Chip survey, and macroeconomic 
models of r*.  For the first two of these, I define “longer run” as a horizon 5 to 
10 years ahead; in the macroeconomic models it is less precisely defined, but 
approximately the same.  The red line in the middle-left panel shows the 5-to-10-year 
forward rate derived from the yields on Treasury securities.  While this forward rate 
is directly observable, it is well understood that long-term forward rates do not 
provide a clean measure of investors’ expectation of the longer-run federal funds rate, 
because forward rates also include a term premium.  The blue shaded area presents 
the range of point estimates of the short-term interest rate expected to prevail 5 to 
10 years ahead, obtained from three staff term structure models.  These model-based 
estimates of the longer-run neutral rate move reasonably closely together; they also 
fluctuate considerably less than the 5-to-10-year forward rate, consistent with the 
view that term premiums can be volatile.  These estimates have risen somewhat over 
the past couple of years and currently range from 3.3 to 3.9 percent.  
The middle-right panel compares the range of term structure model estimates to 
the average longer-run expectation of the federal funds rate from the Blue Chip 
survey.  The estimates drawn from the term-structure models move fairly closely with 
the surveys, which is not surprising, because all three models include in their 
September 25–26, 2018
77 of 153


 
 
 
estimation data provided in Blue Chip surveys, but the models do not have to fit the 
surveys exactly.  In contrast to the term structure models, the average of Blue Chip 
respondents’ longer-run federal funds rate expectations has not moved up in recent 
years. 
There are advantages and disadvantages associated with each of these estimates:  
On the one hand, the Blue Chip survey asks directly about the object of interest, 
whereas the term structure models rely on a number of assumptions to which the 
estimates may be sensitive.  On the other hand, the models aggregate information 
from a much broader range of participants than the survey does. 
Yet another source of information are the longer-run r* estimates derived from 
macroeconomic models.  We periodically report these estimates in the “Monetary 
Policy Strategies” section of Tealbook A.  The pink shaded area in the lower-left 
panel shows the range of five of these estimates, converted to nominal rates by adding 
a survey-based measure of long-term inflation expectations.  These estimates declined 
more sharply in the wake of the financial crisis than those using the term structure 
models and have, on balance, been running a little lower since then, but the range has 
moved up slightly, in this case over the last six years or so.  The range of point 
estimates of the longer-run neutral rate from these models is wide and most recently 
stretches from 2.6 to 4 percent.  All of these model estimates, whether from term 
structure or macro models, are individually uncertain.  Nonetheless, the 
preponderance of the evidence is that there has been some slight upward drift in these 
various estimates over recent years. 
The lower-right panel discusses some implications that these estimates might have 
for your policy decisions in coming meetings.  Because of the substantial uncertainty 
regarding estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate, you may be well served by 
adopting a risk management approach to how these estimates affect your choice of 
the policy rate path.  There is a risk that you may underestimate the longer-run neutral 
rate or how much it has increased in recent years.  If so, then over time, you would 
find that the economy is stronger, and inflation higher, than you expected, and the 
delayed policy response could lead to a greater inflation overshoot than you desire or 
a buildup of financial imbalances.  Once markets come to realize that the path of the 
policy rate would be persistently higher, some asset classes would post losses, 
although this would occur against the backdrop of good news about the strength of 
the economy.  The opposite risk, that the longer-run neutral rate is lower than you 
estimate, could be more pernicious in current circumstances when those estimates are 
already at historically low levels, as it would reduce even further your ability to 
respond to a future downturn with conventional policy.  You may see a continued 
gradual pace of rate increases even in the face of a strong labor market as 
appropriately balancing these two risks. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks.  The August 
statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 9 of the handout.  I will 
be happy to take any questions. 
September 25–26, 2018
78 of 153


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks, Thomas.  Any questions for Thomas?  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, Thomas, these blue shaded regions, I 
guess, do not reflect the uncertainty regarding the estimates.  So this is the range? 
MR. LAUBACH.  This is the range of point estimates.  So, three of them. 
MR. BULLARD.  And if I was going to put a 90 percent confidence band, what would 
it be? 
MR. LAUBACH.  Probably wide.  [Laughter]  
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  It’s safe to say.   
MR. LAUBACH.  Frankly, unfortunately, I don’t know this off the top of my head.  I 
rarely see, actually, confidence intervals around the estimates obtained from these term structure 
models, in part because they are extremely computer-intensive to estimate.  But my best guess is 
that a number of parameters in there are not very well pinned down. 
MR. BULLARD.  Do you think it would include zero? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I don’t know the answer. 
MR. POTTER.  No. 
MR. BULLARD.  Would not? 
MR. POTTER.  No. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, you’re estimating something 5 to 10 years ahead—well, with 
lots of assumptions associated with it, surely it would be— 
MR. POTTER.  We haven’t observed negative nominal rates, though.  It’s very hard to 
do that. 
MR. BULLARD.  I’ve seen negative nominal rates— 
September 25–26, 2018
79 of 153


 
 
 
MR. POTTER.  Not in the United States. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.   
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Just a follow-up on the blue shading.  Can you just walk me through 
again—what is the term premium?  Can you explain that piece of that?  Is that—assuming a 
reversion to historical term premiums, can you just explain that component of this to me again? 
MR. LAUBACH.  All right.  So, I’ll try.  I’m not sure that I’m going to exactly hit your 
question.  So the estimates in the blue shaded region are the ones that have been purged of the 
term premium component— 
MR. KASHKARI.  I see. 
MR. LAUBACH.  —whereas the red line includes the term premium.  So, you know, on 
the basis of that you can sort of roughly gauge what a term premium estimate in these models 
would look like.  So one feature that you can very clearly see, for example, is that the term 
premium, according to these models, was positive up until about 2011-ish or so, has since then 
been around zero, and in recent years slightly negative.  So the one model that I have most 
present in my mind is the Kim-Wright model, which is one of the three that’s in here.  And, for 
example, there the 10-year term premium was for a while negative and has now just edged back 
up into positive territory.  However, here we are looking at a 5-to-10-year-forward concept.  I’d 
have to actually look up what, according to that model, the term premium is right now.  But the 
broad feature is, basically, they were positive up until shortly after the crisis, and then in 2011, in 
particular, they came down sharply, and since then they have been either negative or just sort of 
crawling back to zero. 
MR. POTTER.  Except in late 2013. 
September 25–26, 2018
80 of 153


 
 
 
MR. LAUBACH.  Yes, yes.  So you can see here the hump occurring basically the period 
around the taper tantrum.  I don’t know whether that was the object. 
MR. KASHKARI.  This is going to be a longer conversation, so I won’t bore everybody 
else. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Further questions for Thomas?  [No response]  Seeing none, 
why don’t we adjourn now to the elegant West Court Café [laughter] for a reception and dinner, 
and we’ll resume the meeting tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.  Thanks very much, everyone. 
 [Meeting recessed] 
 
 
September 25–26, 2018
81 of 153


 
 
 
September 26 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All right.  Good morning, everyone.  Let’s begin with our 
policy go-round, starting with President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support increasing the federal funds rate target 
range 25 basis points today, and I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B. 
If the economy evolves as expected—with above-trend growth, tight labor markets, and 
inflation at 2 percent—I expect further rate increases will be warranted to sustain the expansion 
while balancing the risks to the outlook for both parts of our dual mandate and helping mitigate 
the risks of growing financial imbalances.  And this view is supported by historical experience 
and also by economic models, including the Tealbook’s optimal control exercises, and the 
prescriptions of monetary policy rules, which provide a framework for making policy decisions 
in a systematic way. 
Now, yesterday we talked a little bit about the fact that we are behaving a bit differently 
than we have in the past, and I think that’s important to recognize.  And I also think that being 
systematic about it is important—understanding the factors that drive you to behave in a different 
way.  We certainly behaved in a different way during the financial crisis and early in the 
recovery, and we had very good reasons for doing so.  And I think we need to be very careful in 
understanding what factors are driving us to behave differently and then tracking them over time, 
because they can change over time, so that we’re prepared.  I think that’ll help us actually 
explain our rationale for our policy decisions to the public. 
Of course, I’m supporting 25 basis points today.  But if the economy evolves differently, 
then perhaps we’ll have to change our policy.  For some time, the Committee has been moving 
the policy rate up toward the range of estimates of the neutral rate.  The case for moving the rate 
September 25–26, 2018
82 of 153


 
 
 
up has been very compelling, in view of the economy’s strength and the fact that inflation has 
moved up to our target of 2 percent.  Now, as we get closer to the range of estimates of neutral, 
as uncertain as they are, we are nearing a new phase in which determining appropriate policy 
will require the Committee to be even more attentive to the evolution of economic conditions 
and their implications for the medium-run outlook and the risks to the outlook.  And we’ll need 
to give some consideration to how our statement language should evolve to support this new 
phase. 
Regarding statement language today, the question is whether now is the time to delete the 
sentence in paragraph 3 regarding the stance of policy remaining accommodative.  Now, it’s 
possible that removing this sentence will cause market participants to revise down their 
expectations for further rate increases.  But as the minutes of our previous meeting indicate that 
this language would be revised “in the not-too-distant future,” that there’s a press conference 
today, and that paragraph 2 in the statement continues to say that further increases are consistent 
with sustained expansion, I think that any misinterpretation of the removal of the sentence can be 
handled.  In addition, there’s probably less signal about future rate increases from removing this 
language when there’s a strong consensus in the market that further rate increases are likely to be 
warranted.  So I support removing this sentence today. 
Looking forward, I continue to think we should try to include more information in the 
statement about the Committee’s outlook so that we can more clearly tie any indications about 
future policy to the outlook and risks to the outlook. 
Finally, I understand we will be discussing the operating framework at coming meetings 
this year.  I’m also looking forward to our discussion of the monetary policy framework next 
year.  President Rosengren recently laid out a solid proposal for what a review of the policy 
September 25–26, 2018
83 of 153


 
 
 
framework should entail, including making it a regular evaluation and making it more open.  
Seeking the views of external experts, including academic economists and market participants, to 
inform our work appeals to me.  It’s similar to what the Bank of Canada does when it renews its 
agreement with the government on its inflation target.  And, as I’ve said before, any changes to 
our policy framework have to be well thought out.  A workshop, laying out the issues and 
gathering diverse views, is an idea worth serious consideration.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  While I support alternative B, I could also 
have supported some of the language in alternative C for this meeting.  Removing the language 
on monetary policy remaining accommodative could be interpreted quite dovishly.  That is, at a 
rate of 2 to 2¼ percent, we’re moving out of accommodative rate territory. 
While the uncertainty about r* admits this possibility, this is at the very lower end of 
estimates of r* and is not consistent with most of the estimates presented in the SEP.  This 
certainly would not be the message I would want to convey after a meeting at which the 
Tealbook has the unemployment rate drifting to lows we have not seen in 50 years.  By fully 
explaining the change in the press conference, this perception can be avoided.  However, such a 
discussion has the potential to sound much more “hawkish,” possibly resulting in a steeper yield 
curve than is intended.  I trust the Chairman will be able to negotiate this difficult 
communication challenge. 
My baseline forecast has quarterly increases in the federal funds rate for the next year and 
a half.  My funds rate path does not include a pause in increases at the point when it reaches my 
estimate of the medium-term equilibrium rate.  In fact, I think that rates will need to continue to 
gradually rise until we are mildly restrictive in our monetary policy stance.  With significant 
September 25–26, 2018
84 of 153


 
 
 
tailwinds being provided by fiscal policy, the unemployment rate is likely to fall further below 
our estimate of the natural rate, and, with wage and price pressures gradually building, there is a 
risk that moving too gradually will allow price and financial stability pressures to build to the 
point at which more aggressive action will eventually be necessary. 
I see the balance of risks inherent in a too gradual increase in rates as tilted toward our 
becoming the cause of the next recession, an outcome that I hope can be avoided by continuing 
steadily to raise rates.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Acting President Gould. 
MR. GOULD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  The recent 
strong economic growth well above trend has drawn down the unemployment rate and pushed us 
further beyond full employment.  In addition, inflation has reached our target and appears likely 
to edge above 2 percent during the next year or two.  In these economic conditions, raising the 
funds rate today is the appropriate policy response.  In addition, the economy has considerable 
forward momentum, and this bolsters the case for signaling a path of further steady but gradual 
rate increases. 
I also prefer removing the “accommodative stance” sentence at this meeting.  That 
sentence has been in every FOMC statement since liftoff in December 2015, and it has served 
this Committee well.  But on account of the favorable economic conditions, it’s time to de-
emphasize accommodation and instead focus on communicating a policy setting consistent with 
sustainable growth. 
This meeting seems like a particularly opportune time to make this change, because we’re 
still comfortably away from most estimates of neutral.  If we wait too long, the removal of the 
“accommodative stance” sentence could be taken as signaling the precise level of r*, which 
September 25–26, 2018
85 of 153


 
 
 
could convey a misplaced sense of precision.  Today’s press conference will provide an 
opportunity for the Chairman to clarify this change in language.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support a 25 basis point increase in the funds 
rate at this meeting and alternative B as written.  Inflation has moved up to target, and labor 
market conditions remain tight.  The recent uptick in wage growth is welcome, and if that growth 
translates into a bit more price pressure, that would be welcome as well. 
The recent fiscal stimulus may in part be responsible for the strengthening in inflation 
and could cause inflation to modestly exceed our target in the near future.  Those tailwinds will 
likely be transitory, as the tax cuts may not be permanent and current levels of government 
spending may be unsustainable.  Thus, I believe that any overshooting in inflation will likely be 
short-lived, and that future policy should err on the side of caution when considering the 
appropriate degree of tightening in response to inflation exceeding target. 
With the transitory increase in demand, the price level will need to rise only modestly.  
Firms facing price rigidities will not respond in an aggressive manner to this type of shock.  We 
have considerable credibility, which will afford us time to act, should price pressures begin to 
build more strongly than I envision.  Some overshooting of our inflation target will not unleash 
the inflationary dog and will not threaten our credibility as responsible inflation targeters.  
Additionally, we will need to look through the tariff-induced response of prices in order to assess 
the fundamental degree of price pressures in the economy. 
Further, I do not believe that the economy is quite as strong as recent GDP growth 
implies.  Gross Domestic Income growth has been a bit weaker, and the measure computed at the 
Philadelphia Bank that optimally combines the two, which we call “GDPplus,” indicates growth 
September 25–26, 2018
86 of 153


 
 
 
roughly ½ percentage point lower growth this year than what one observes when looking at GDP 
expenditure on its own. 
For these reasons, I have not penciled in another rate hike for this year and envision only 
two rate hikes in each of the succeeding two years.  Of course, incoming data may cause me to 
revisit this policy stance before December. 
I also find myself, as others have said, looking forward to our December meeting when 
we take an intense look into our longer-run framework.  I appreciate and share the Chair’s 
concern for the importance of this discussion.  The topic raises difficult issues, and the 
assembled team looks ready to give us the detailed and in-depth background that will be required 
for an informed assessment of the alternatives, and I thank them for their work.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  I do 
believe we should be gradually and patiently removing accommodation, at least until we get to a 
level that approximates our best estimate of the neutral rate.  As I say this, I’m mindful of the 
following issues.  Number one, monetary policy acts with a lag.  
Number two, I still believe that the effect of fiscal stimulus will likely fade in 2019 and 
further in 2020, and that current economic data—incoming economic data—are being heavily 
influenced by fiscal stimulus.  As a result, I’d prefer to say that my views on future monetary 
policy moves  will be more dependent on the outlook than dependent on current data, because I 
believe the current fiscal stimulus is having a substantial effect on current economic data. 
Number three, our tools in a downturn, I think, are likely to be less potent than in the 
past—that is, it’s easier to tighten than to ease, and I’m cognizant that in the next downturn, there 
September 25–26, 2018
87 of 153


 
 
 
may be less capacity for fiscal stimulus due to the path of current government debt-to-GDP and 
high deficits. 
All of this suggests to me that, as we move gradually and patiently, we should not be 
predetermined about what we might do once we’ve reached our best estimate of the neutral level, 
which I understand will be a range, and we’ll have a debate about that.  And I’m also keeping 
open in my mind the possibility that the economic outlook by mid-2019 may look very different 
from the outlook today due to, again, waning fiscal stimulus at the same time that the effect of 
our current rate increases is taking hold.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying that I support 
President Mester’s suggestion for “regular review” of our framework.  I think that that is a best 
practice for central banks.  I think the Bank of Canada has led the way on this, and we should do 
this, especially during a period when things are going well for us, with inflation at target and the 
economy doing very well.  It’s not realistic to think that any framework is going to last over 
many decades, so there should be minor tweaks, probably, over time.  But you want to do that in 
a way that gets the discussion out of, and away from, the day-to-day grind of monetary policy.  
So I support her suggestion.  I know others on the Committee have talked about this both here at 
the Committee and outside the Committee meetings. 
I have projected no planned rate increases over the past two years.  I’ve not put rate 
increases in the SEP.  In my view, it’s not been appropriate to signal that we knew for sure the 
right path of policy.  During that time, the economy has consistently surprised to the upside, as 
mentioned by Governor Clarida yesterday.  I tried to look at what the Committee thought would 
happen as of the January 2017 FOMC meeting, and it looks to me like 2017, on real GDP 
September 25–26, 2018
88 of 153


 
 
 
growth, surprised to the upside by about ½ percentage point over what we thought at that time, 
with 2018 now surprising by about 1 percentage point on the growth rate compared with that 
time, and even 2019—another ½ percentage point on GDP growth.  So it has been a period of 
upside surprise for the economy, and if you add all of that together, you get about 2 percent on 
the level of real GDP.  That’s a substantial upside surprise.  In my view, this has justified some 
policy rate increases during 2017 and 2018, and I’ve gone along with these as they have 
occurred, based in part on the idea that the economy has surprised to the upside. 
The Committee has also established during this period a plan to allow the balance sheet 
to run down, which is, I think, serving us well.  And I think we should keep in mind that the size 
of the balance sheet is shrinking faster than you think, because the economy is also growing.  So 
it’s really the size of the balance sheet relative to GDP that matters.  And that’s, in my opinion, 
going very well. 
Altogether, the rate increases plus the balance sheet rundown have put the Committee in 
a good position today.  In my opinion, we’ve been preemptive against possible inflation pressure 
during a period when inflation was running below target.  Since we’ve already been preemptive, 
it’s not clear in my mind what the next direction of monetary policy needs to be.  I think we 
should be data dependent and look at what’s going to happen.  I agree with President Kaplan that 
the good news on the economy will not continue forever.  We have to be prepared to pause, if 
necessary, when the moment comes. 
I think the Committee should, generally speaking, be more cognizant of market signals 
than is often the case here.  We’re very model-centric in our analysis.  In particular, I think we 
should avoid inverting the yield curve deliberately and therefore pushing recession risk higher 
than necessary, as outlined by David Wilcox yesterday. 
September 25–26, 2018
89 of 153


 
 
 
I would stress, on this argument, a couple of points.  The yield curve is not inverted 
today, so it doesn’t surprise me that recession probability models say that the recession risk is 
low today.  We have very strong growth, with everything looking good today.  So I think it’s a 
bit of a sleight of hand to say that recession probabilities are low today.  The point is, are we 
going to deliberately invert the yield curve, let’s say, over the next year?  And even then, the 
yield curve would have to not just invert for a moment, but also stay sustainably inverted for a 
period.  Even then, a straight read of the data would say it would be 15 months after that before 
you’d get any kind of downturn, presuming that the effects that have been there historically 
would repeat themselves.  So, in the presence of those kinds of time lags, I think the issue of 
what to think about the yield curve and what to think about yield-curve inversion will be with us 
for a long time to come, and it’ll be part of the debate here for quite a while. 
I would point to the late 1990s as a successful case which we should try to emulate.  In 
the second half of the 1990s—let me start a little earlier.  In the middle of the 1990s, this 
Committee raised the funds rate a shocking 300 basis points in a single year.  But the Committee 
did stop at that point, and the yield curve did not invert in 1995 or, indeed, all through the rest of 
the 1990s.  You had a positive slope to the yield curve, and the slope ranged anywhere from 0 to 
100 basis points.  The long-term average on the yield curve spread between the 10-year and the 
2-year rates is about 70 basis points. 
So I consider the late 1990s a successful case.  That was a point when we did normalize 
monetary policy according to that era, but we didn’t overdo it, and we got very good outcomes 
for the economy, including extremely low unemployment rates, which helped us a lot.  When the 
yield curve did invert in 2000, sure enough, recession followed not too long after.  So I think we 
should keep that particular case in mind when thinking about this issue.  But it’s going to be with 
September 25–26, 2018
90 of 153


 
 
 
us for a long time.  And the good news is, the yield curve is not inverted today, so we don’t seem 
to have too much problem today.  And, like President Kashkari, I’m a little bit encouraged that 
maybe, indeed, the 10-year Treasury yield will move up, as we’ve been expecting, and we’ll 
keep an eye on that, based on recent observations on that particular yield. 
I also think, as I was discussing yesterday, that the FOMC should give more 
consideration to the asymmetric loss function idea.  This is something that was presented by 
Thomas Laubach in a presentation to the FOMC several meetings ago.  In my opinion, it better 
reflects Committee views on how we probably are thinking about the economy.  We had some 
news yesterday about Ed Knotek’s Taylor rule calculation using the SEP.  That calculation 
seemed to indicate that the Committee was putting less weight on the unemployment gap than 
you would otherwise—possibly close to zero weight on the unemployment gap—which would 
suggest to me that we’re not taking that much signal for inflation on the basis of the good labor 
market performance.  That makes a lot of sense:  When you get to a situation like today, with 
inflation at target and good labor market performance, you could just focus on the inflation part 
of the mandate—let’s keep inflation close to target—and that would be the right thing to do 
when unemployment is low and the Phillips curve is flat.  But, just focusing on inflation, you’re 
going to guard against the possibility that you would get a sudden upsurge in inflation.  But you 
don’t have to pencil in the idea that the unemployment rate has to go up 90 basis points or 100 
basis points in order to keep inflation under control. 
So if you look—just to remind you—at Tealbook A’s “Monetary Policy Strategies” 
section, you do get very similar inflation outcomes, but with a very flat policy rate projection, if 
you take this asymmetric loss, optimal control exercise seriously, and I think we should take it 
seriously.  So I’d like to perhaps talk more about that at future meetings. 
September 25–26, 2018
91 of 153


 
 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention my views on the Dallas Fed trimmed mean, of which 
I’ve been a proponent for a long time.  I very much enjoyed the memos on this.  I thought they 
were very well done.  I have long felt that the Dallas Fed trimmed mean is a good idea for this 
Committee.  I would take the bottom line of the memos to be that it has good properties as a 
trend measure of inflation. 
I think it’s just, generally speaking, a better idea for this Committee to refer to the Dallas 
Fed trimmed mean rate as opposed to core inflation.  The core inflation calculation arbitrarily 
cuts out two categories of prices, food and energy.  The problem with that from a 
communications perspective is that, for most people, their market interaction is actually going to 
the grocery store and going to the gas station.  So it’s very bad public relations for this 
Committee to say that we’re ignoring the prices that people experience the most, day to day.  The 
trimmed mean, I think, helps us with that.  It amounts to a more rigorous technical measure of 
what we’re trying to get at in terms of underlying inflation. 
Finally, I think this would have helped us a lot in 2017.  So 2017 was our test case for 
whether we should look at core inflation or the Dallas Fed trimmed mean, but in 2017, you had 
this special event in March, when cell phone prices declined precipitously.  Because we focus on 
core inflation, we spent the entire year telling the markets and whoever else would listen, “Oh, 
this is all temporary, and it’s going to roll out of the year-over-year comparison,” which it did.  
But if we had focused on the Dallas Fed trimmed mean, there would have been no cause for 
telling that story, because the Dallas Fed trimmed mean did not decline precipitously the way 
core inflation did; the Dallas Fed trimmed mean naturally took out these big declines in cell 
phone prices. 
September 25–26, 2018
92 of 153


 
 
 
So there’s a lot to be said for this measure.  I know a lot of people here have been 
referring to it more and more, and the staff has been using it more and more in analysis, and I 
think that that’s all healthy and good. 
Lastly, I support alternative B for today.  I do think that the removal of the 
“accommodative” language sets the Committee up to pause if desired, but not necessarily, which 
is, I think, exactly what we’ll need over the next year.  And I also am hopeful regarding the press 
conferences at every meeting—the next meeting will be the last meeting that doesn’t have a 
press conference afterward.  All meetings after that will have a press conference.  That will allow 
the Committee and the Chair a great deal of flexibility and allow us to be more data dependent, 
which is what we’ll need from now on.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The economy is continuing to expand rapidly 
at a time when we’re already beyond most estimates of full employment and inflation is at target, 
and there’s substantial fiscal stimulus in the pipeline, which will likely keep the economy 
growing at an above-trend pace into next year. 
I believe it remains critical to return underlying trend inflation to our 2 percent inflation 
objective.  We are on track to accomplish this.  But there are risks in running the economy “too 
hot.”  As we know from previous episodes, the dynamics of inflation expectations may change 
unpredictably at very low unemployment rates, and financial imbalances may reach unsound 
levels. 
A gradual pace of funds rate increases seems appropriate to achieve the important goal of 
anchoring underlying trend inflation at target, after a long period of undershooting, while 
recognizing that the short-run neutral rate is likely rising due to rising tailwinds.  Like many of 
September 25–26, 2018
93 of 153


 
 
 
you, I do find the neutral rate of interest to be an important frame of reference.  But in periods 
when the economy is buffeted by headwinds or tailwinds, I find it helpful—indeed, vital—to 
distinguish between the short-run and long-run levels of the neutral rate.  The longer-run neutral 
rate—which is the focus of most of our discussions here—is the appropriate equilibrium in 
circumstances in which the economy has converged to its longer-run trend, after headwinds or 
tailwinds have played out, in an environment of full employment and stable inflation.  But in the 
shorter run, the neutral rate doesn’t stay fixed but, rather, fluctuates along with important 
headwinds or tailwinds.  For that reason, whenever there are material headwinds or tailwinds, the 
shorter-run neutral rate, rather than the longer-run federal funds rate, is the relevant benchmark 
for assessing the near-term path of monetary policy. 
The shorter-run neutral rate tends to be cyclical, falling below long-run neutral in 
recessions and rising during expansions, and estimates suggest the current expansion is no 
exception.  Indeed, Janet Yellen often made the case for the shorter-run neutral rate being below 
its long-run equilibrium value during a time when the Committee kept the federal funds rate, in 
real terms, negative for nearly a decade.  And this was instrumental in reducing the 
unemployment rate to pre-crisis levels, as happened last year. 
This year, at the same time that the federal funds rate has increased, the unemployment 
rate has fallen further, and job market gains have gathered strength.  That combination suggests 
that the short-run neutral rate has increased.  If, instead, it had remained constant, as the federal 
funds rate increased, we would have expected to see labor market gains slow. 
That intuition is supported by the formal model estimates.  It’s also corroborated by the 
observation that financial conditions overall have remained quite accommodative during a period 
when the federal funds rate has been moving higher.  It also lines up with the latest FOMC SEP 
September 25–26, 2018
94 of 153


 
 
 
median path, which shows the federal funds rate projected to rise to a level that exceeds the 
longer-run federal funds rate during a time when real GDP growth is expected to exceed its 
longer-run trend rate and unemployment continues to fall.  That circumstance has been described 
as restrictive by some. 
Yesterday, we discussed some specific factors that may be expected to push the short-run 
neutral rate above its longer-run trend in the next year or two—in particular, the sizable deficit-
financed fiscal stimulus in the pipeline as well as the relatively “rich” level of current asset 
valuations.  Further out, the neutral rate and the policy rate path will depend on how the 
economy evolves. 
As I’ve indicated previously, I strongly support the proposal to remove the reference to 
“accommodative” from the statement.  To be clear:  I don’t believe the federal funds rate is 
approaching its neutral rate.  As I just explained, my estimate of the short-run neutral rate has 
moved up.  Rather, I believe that the language—which was originally intended as forward 
guidance—has outlived its usefulness and no longer provides meaningful information about the 
Committee’s reaction function. 
Finally, with fiscal policy and the economy’s momentum likely to push the short-run 
neutral rate above its longer-run level, it’s not surprising that in most of our SEP submissions, 
the setting of the federal funds rate exceeds current estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate.  
That raises the possibility of a flattening or inversion of the yield curve in the event that term 
premiums don’t rise from their current, very low levels.  Around this table, we’ve discussed at 
some length the historical observation that inversions of the yield curve linking the 3-month and 
10-year Treasury rates have had a relatively reliable track record of preceding recessions.  But 
today the 10-year yield is about half the average during these historical episodes. 
September 25–26, 2018
95 of 153


 
 
 
To the extent that the historically low level of the term premium globally reflects the 
asset purchases of central banks in several major economies, if the term premium rises as the 
effective asset purchase programs diminish, the effect may be to forestall that yield-curve 
inversion.  But if the term premium remains very low—due to some other factors that we’ve 
discussed—even a modest tightening that might not have led to an inversion historically could do 
so today without necessarily providing the same signal as in previous decades. 
So I will keep a close watch on movements in the yield curve.  But I want to interpret 
such movements holistically, as one of our colleagues said in an earlier meeting.  Indeed, that 
uncertainty about the yield curve is one of the compelling reasons to continue raising interest 
rates gradually, as we’ve done so far.  In the absence of an unexpected acceleration of inflation 
or financial imbalances, that gradual pace should give us some time to assess the effect of our 
policies and make course corrections as we proceed.  In short, with the economy at, or beyond, 
full employment, inflation at target, and fiscal and financial tailwinds reinforcing above-trend 
real GDP growth, continued gradual increases are likely to be appropriate. 
Beyond the near term, how much further the short-run neutral rate is likely to rise and 
whether it flattens or retreats will depend on a variety of developments—whether fiscal stimulus 
is extended or expires, whether foreign and trade risks grow or recede, and whether financial 
system vulnerabilities extend.  The gradual pace implicit in the SEP’s median policy rate path 
incorporates a degree of caution—which is appropriate, in my view.  For all of these reasons, I 
support alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
September 25–26, 2018
96 of 153


 
 
 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I need to address something that I 
forgot to do yesterday.  Since transparency is my lodestar—it wasn’t me [laughter]—I am SEP 
participant number 14. 
I support alternative B as written.  An increase in the policy rate at this meeting is 
consistent with the gradual path that the Committee has communicated and been following.  In 
particular, I support the removal of the “remains accommodative” language.  I think Governor 
Brainard expressed it perfectly, at least the way I’m thinking about it, which is, it’s not that I 
think that we actually have reached a neutral level.  In fact, my estimate of the long-run neutral 
level is higher than most people’s on the Committee.  But the language was important when 
policy normalization was first initiated.  It was a useful reminder that those first post-crisis hikes 
didn’t signal an intent to slow the economy.  But, at this point in the process of normalization, 
the utility of that language has faded.  And taking it out now saves us the trouble of trying to 
communicate exactly when it is that we think that policy is no longer accommodative, which is a 
tipping point that will be impossible to identify with precision and, hence, over which there’s 
going to be a wide divergence of opinion around this table. 
As I discussed yesterday, I’m fairly optimistic about the potential growth rate of the 
economy as well as the capacity for increases in labor force participation to provide additional 
slack to be taken up, thereby restraining increases in prices.  Certainly, inflationary pressures 
appear to remain modest, with the most recent data, which consisted of the August CPI, even 
surprising a little bit on the downside.  So, all in all, I think the data have been very supportive of 
this gradual approach toward removing policy accommodation that we have been following. 
As part of that gradualism, in my utopia, I would be most comfortable continuing the 
gradual slope of policy normalization that we have been on, which would be three rate increases 
September 25–26, 2018
97 of 153


 
 
 
this year and not one in December.  As I said yesterday, I haven’t changed my economic outlook 
since the beginning of the year.  In the March SEP, I wrote down an optimal policy rate path that 
included three rate hikes in 2018.  The economy has been surprising some people to the upside.  
But, as the data have largely come in as I expected at that time, a consistent approach to 
monetary policy would maintain the same optimal policy rate path.  A change in the profile of 
risks might shift that optimal path even as the baseline forecast is unchanged.  But if anything, 
I’d argue that the risks have increased, to a minor extent, as the year has progressed.  The foreign 
outlook is a little cloudier, after a very upbeat start to the beginning of the year.  Trade tensions 
continue to escalate. 
But, most importantly, my view about what gradualism would imply for our future rate 
path has to do with two differing views of the meaning of the mantra of data dependence—the 
two potential images that could be conjured.  The first is a wholly salutary intellectual openness 
and humility.  I think it was Thomas Carlyle who said—when he heard that Margaret Fuller had 
said, “I accept the universe”—“Gad!  She’d better.”  But the other potential image of data 
dependence is that of the mad scientist in the laboratory—with the beakers overflowing, with the 
dry-ice smoke and the spark jumping between the two wires—fiddling with the dials with 
precision, which is a level of science and precision regarding what we are doing that I think is 
beyond our powers.  So, for me, our job is to articulate clearly a general path without fiddling 
with the dials, still remaining intellectually open to large signals that are given us.  And I think 
that continuing the path that we had previously articulated gives us an opportunity to evaluate the 
underlying strength of the economy, confirm that inflation has indeed firmed at its target, and 
assess the effects of our tightening up to this point. 
September 25–26, 2018
98 of 153


 
 
 
Additionally, a logistical advantage of that approach would be that, with a press 
conference following every meeting after November, not moving in December doesn’t lock us 
into anything for very long and would provide an opportunity only six weeks later, in January, to 
demonstrate immediately that every meeting is “live.”  So the signal value of skipping December 
would be an affirmation of our commitment to gradualism while also an immediate 
demonstration of the flexibility of the new communication strategy.  That said, we would have to 
provide careful communication of the message that not moving in December was not a pause.  
That doesn’t mean that we’re done, especially in the context of the removal of the “remains 
accommodative” language from this meeting’s statement. 
As I’ve said a number of times, I continue to be an r* optimist.  My estimate of the 
longer-run policy rate is at the high end of Committee estimates—it used to be the tippy-top, and 
now someone has beaten me—which is consistent with a higher projection of potential growth.  
But as Thomas has pointed out, many estimates of r* have been inching up recently.  And as r* 
increases, any given setting of policy becomes more accommodative so that more hikes are 
likely coming.  That said, while there are arguments on both sides, I think we can afford to be 
patient.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Wow, how am I going to follow that?  Okay.  
I’ll be a little bit more boring.  But those were great insights given by Randy. 
I support a decision today to raise the target range for the funds rate by 25 basis points, 
and I prefer the language in alternative B.  For the first time in a very long time, the Committee 
is achieving—or, in the case of our unemployment objective, perhaps more than meeting—both 
pillars of our dual mandate.  The momentum in the economy appears to be robust.  The labor 
September 25–26, 2018
99 of 153


 
 
 
market is strong.  And even after today’s decision, the federal funds rate will, for the first time in 
a decade, be only barely above our inflation objective. 
I’ll talk a little bit about market-based measures, piggybacking off President Bullard.  
Market-based measures of our policy normalization path obtained from interest rate futures 
suggest that the markets have priced in several more rate hikes over the next year or so.  And, 
importantly, market-based measures of inflation expectations have rebounded to levels that I 
interpret as consistent, but just barely, with our long-run inflation objective of 2 percent. 
I believe that these inflation expectations proxies discount at least some of the additional 
rate hikes that the Committee believes will be consistent with economic expansion and inflation 
near our 2 percent objective.  And this tells me that we are not yet in a situation in which a 
contemplated firming of monetary policy would be expected to push inflation expectations below 
our 2 percent target.  However, that said, these market-based measures of inflation expectations 
are still somewhat below where they were at a comparable stage in the previous cycle, so I’m 
certainly not complacent about it. 
So, maybe just a bit of an aside about how I think about market-based information—I 
don’t ever want to be handcuffed to it, but it’s certainly something I want in my inbox every 
morning to look at. 
I support a decision today to delete the language saying that “policy remains 
accommodative.”  If we decide to delete this language today, there may inevitably be questions 
as to what motivates the Committee to remove the language now, as opposed to doing so at some 
future meeting.  Speaking for myself, I think it makes sense to do so at a meeting in which we 
raise the target range for the funds rate above our 2 percent inflation objective, but before that 
target range begins to overlap with some individual participants’ estimates of the longer-run 
September 25–26, 2018
100 of 153


 
 
 
neutral rate.  If we were to delay the decision to such a point in time, it could convey to the 
public a sense of precision about our estimates of r* that does not accurately reflect the 
uncertainty about these estimates. 
If I may look ahead a little bit, as I see that this is an allowed custom here, while I believe 
it will likely be necessary over the next several years for monetary policy to enter restrictive 
territory, at least relative to my estimate of r*, so that we could contain any potential overshoot 
of core inflation.  This has been the case in previous cycles.  I personally expect that the required 
adjustment in the policy rate relative to my estimate of r* may be somewhat more modest than in 
past cycles.  And in making this assessment, I’m factoring in a scenario in which the relative 
stance of fiscal policy—in particular, Treasury bond supply—could push up not inflation 
compensation, but the real term premium on government bonds back to a level more consistent 
with historical experience, and also based on what we saw in the international briefing. 
Our relative stance of policy under this scenario could give additional support to the 
dollar.  So, were this to occur—a return to a more normal term premium and dollar 
appreciation—given our stance of policy, it could mean that the longer-run policy rate consistent 
with our dual-mandate objectives could be somewhat lower than if we did not see a rebound in 
the term premium or this response of the dollar.  Of course, neither of these is preordained.  I’m 
just outlining one scenario.  And there remains significant uncertainty about the point at which 
policy inflects from accommodative to restrictive.  But at least that’s one factor I’d think about in 
terms of longer-term scenarios.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B.  I find today’s decision 
relatively straightforward.  We’ve outlined the gradual path.  Growth, inflation, and 
September 25–26, 2018
101 of 153


 
 
 
unemployment have all tracked about as we expected and as I reflect in my SEP, which is little 
changed from June.  We’re still, in my judgment, a long way from restricting the economy, so 
we ought to stay on the path we’ve outlined and raise rates today. 
How we want to position policy for the next year is a more complex question.  We’re 
nearing many estimates of the neutral rate, several of which are drifting up as the economy 
performs well.  The data are unlikely to stay as consistent, and we could see shocks on both the 
upside and downside that would force us to consider restricting or loosening. 
As I said yesterday, those shocks could show up in inflation and financial excesses, but 
also in supply constraints.  Supply constraints, should they occur on a large scale, could muddy 
the metrics we normally watch.  Growth in employment could slow because of overheating 
rather than tightening.  Inflation could increase, but anchoring might limit that signal, too.  So, in 
addition to our usual metrics, I plan to also watch the classic indicators of constraints, such as job 
vacancy rates, service levels, and stock-outs. 
On the statement, I quite like the new—and might I say “terse”?—statement we’re 
approving today.  I think it gives us maximum flexibility to send, with minimum confusion, any 
signals we will want to send when the time is right. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B and increasing the 
federal funds rate target range 25 basis points, to 2 to 2¼ percent.  I also support removing the 
characterization of monetary policy as accommodative at 2 to 2¼ percent.  This is below my 
long-run funds rate of 2¾ percent.  And I agree with Governor Clarida:  In the presence of all of 
the uncertainties, it’s better to remove any suggestion that we have a precise characterization of 
monetary policy today. 
September 25–26, 2018
102 of 153


 
 
 
My SEP submission envisions raising the funds rate to a range of 3 to 3¼ percent by the 
end of 2019.  So I also support paragraph 2 language that includes “further gradual increases.”  
By my long-run funds rate, a funds rate endpoint range of 3 to 3¼ percent is modestly restrictive 
in 2019 and through 2021.  I will monitor different assessments based on our shorter-run 
assessment of the neutral funds rate, but for today, I don’t think that’s critical. 
I see inflation slightly above our 2 percent objective, with core PCE inflation at 
2.2 percent in both 2020 and 2021.  With sustained growth and strong labor markets through the 
forecast horizon, this is a good place for monetary policy to be.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  As we move 
into 2019, judging the stance of policy will become increasingly challenging, in my view.  The 
gradual path of interest rate increases has moved the stance of policy closer to neutral in the 
context of today’s tight labor markets and inflation near target. 
Yet as policy accommodation has diminished, financial conditions overall have actually 
eased, as illustrated by a number of financial condition indexes, including one we publish at the 
Kansas City Fed.  At the same time, we are more directly confronted with the uncertainty 
associated with a wide range of estimates of the neutral rate.  At this stage in the normalization 
process, it seems to me that we must be particularly vigilant in calibrating policy in order to best 
promote long-run sustainable growth, consistent with our objectives, including the risk to the 
financial system that could impede the attainment of the FOMC’s goals. 
Under these conditions, removing language in today’s statement about the 
accommodative stance of policy seems appropriate to me.  And, although I continue to think 
additional increases in the federal funds rate could be appropriate, we may need to consider 
September 25–26, 2018
103 of 153


 
 
 
further adjustments to the language at upcoming meetings that allow the Committee to take a 
systematic, and perhaps even more patient, approach to its policy decisions based on the outlook 
as it is influenced by incoming information on the economy, rather than following what may 
become viewed as a preset course of further gradual increases at every other meeting.  Thank 
you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the policy action in alternative B 
and have no comment on the proposed statement language.  I am comfortable dropping the 
“accommodative” language—I guess I do have a statement.  [Laughter]  Retract that.  Just strike 
that.  [Laughter]  So I am comfortable dropping the “accommodative” language—and I’m going 
to make my statement now—for the same reasons articulated by my colleagues here.  And, like 
them, I take comfort in the Chairman having the opportunity to explain our rationale at today’s 
press conference.  We’re counting on you, Mr. Chairman. 
At the previous meeting, I noted that even though the data in the second quarter were 
stronger than I had expected, I did not take that as a signal of stronger real GDP growth in the 
period ahead, and I felt comfortable with a total of three 25 basis point moves this calendar year.  
Since then, the data have continued to be stronger than I anticipated, and, as a consequence, I 
have again moderately increased my growth outlook through 2019.  If the data come in over the 
next couple of months consistent with this new forecast, then I think it will be appropriate to pull 
forward the timing of rate increases a bit, to four increases this year. 
For me, this is about timing and is not a change in the overall strategy.  As before, 
though, I would not advocate moving policy beyond the range of estimates for neutral, which I 
have at between 2¾ and 3 percent, and I would not be in favor of moving us into a more 
September 25–26, 2018
104 of 153


 
 
 
contractionary policy stance without seeing more and clearer evidence that the economy is 
overheating.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Since our 
previous meeting, inflation has reached our target, wage growth has picked up somewhat, long-
term rates have picked up slightly, and economic growth has been strong.  In this context, raising 
rates today is appropriate. 
Looking forward, I’m more focused on our communications about the future path of 
monetary policy.  Assuming that inflation and inflation expectations remain close to target, I 
believe we should move gradually to a neutral policy stance.  In contrast, the Tealbook and the 
SEP outline a more contractionary policy rate path, with the federal funds rate significantly 
overshooting its long-run rate.  Let me explain why I think such a policy would be a mistake in 
the absence of an increase in inflation or inflation expectations. 
First, I don’t buy the argument that the economy is operating far above potential and thus 
at risk of overheating.  Ongoing strong job growth and modest nominal wage growth suggest we 
have yet to reach full employment.  We should let growth continue as long as people are willing 
to continue entering employment.  And you’ve heard me say this before:  Trying to assess supply 
and demand in a market starts by looking at the price.  The idea that the U.S. economy is running 
above potential but it’s not showing up in price, or that there are big labor shortages but it’s not 
showing up in wages—both of those tell me we’re probably not really at full capacity yet. 
Second, I don’t think that we should raise rates more sharply to offset the expansion in 
fiscal policy.  There are three scenarios I see.  One is that the fiscal expansion, just by virtue of 
leading to the issuing of more debt, leads to longer-term higher inflation.  Well, that’s a 
September 25–26, 2018
105 of 153


 
 
 
possibility, but there’s no evidence for that right now.  Long-term inflation expectations are 
anchored.  So that scenario doesn’t seem to be happening. 
The second scenario is, it’s just sugar.  It’s just temporary sugar.  It doesn’t affect long-
term inflation expectations.  If it’s just sugar, we should just let the sugar burn itself off.  I don’t 
see why we would have to respond to that. 
The third is, it actually leads to more investment, which also should not be inflationary.  
It’s going to increase the productive capacity of the economy.  So, absent some uptick in long-
term inflation expectations, it isn’t clear why we would respond to a fiscal stimulus that’s been 
passed. 
My third point is about financial stability.  Several members of the Committee, this time 
and in previous meetings, have talked about financial stability concerns as a reason to raise rates.  
I’ve obviously been very outspoken publicly about the need to increase capital requirements for 
the biggest banks because of financial stability concerns.  I’ve not been as focused on the 
countercyclical capital buffer, just because it’s relatively small compared with what I think is 
needed.  Nonetheless, I’ve been pushing my staff to analyze the relative costs of using monetary 
policy versus bank capital requirements to address financial stability risk. 
Now, this is an inexact science, as is a lot of what we do here, but no matter how we do 
the analysis, raising rates is many times more costly to the real economy than raising bank 
capital.  I mean, it’s anywhere from a few multiples more costly to an order of magnitude more 
costly in terms of cost to GDP and cost to jobs.  And I think it’s intuitively obvious that we 
should use the lower-cost tools before we use the higher-cost tools.  So as we think about 
financial stability risks, I would encourage us to think in that capacity. 
September 25–26, 2018
106 of 153


 
 
 
Finally, overtightening creates its own risks.  You know, David talked about the yield 
curve in the context of recessions.  If we slowed the economy to forestall inflation that is not, in 
fact, materializing, we are increasing recession risk.  Whether it’s a case of literal causation 
between the yield curve and economic activity, or it’s just a matter of creating a slow-growth 
environment in which we’re more vulnerable to downside shocks, nonetheless we are increasing 
the odds that the economy gets hit with something just by virtue of raising rates.  So I think we 
should proceed cautiously. 
So, in sum, I believe we should communicate a plan to move gradually to a neutral stance 
while emphasizing that we will adjust the path of the policy rate as data evolve. 
And the last thing on language, although not for this meeting—to avoid giving the 
impression that we plan to move beyond neutral into a contractionary stance, I would encourage 
us to drop the language soon about “further gradual increases in the target range” being 
“consistent”—I think we could be silent on what’s going to happen to the policy rate path, just 
like we’re being silent on where we are relative to neutral, and just let the data guide us and then 
respond appropriately.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This morning there’s some 
chatter about a Wall Street Journal op-ed disparaging the usefulness of r* in terms of thinking 
about monetary policy.  I’ve been very encouraged by the comments, especially by the 
Governors this morning, highlighting the importance of this concept.  So I will paraphrase Mark 
Twain:  The rumors of the death of r* are greatly exaggerated.  [Laughter] 
Okay.  So, once again, I somehow find myself in full support of alternative B as written.  
At our previous meeting, I said that, barring any dramatic change in the outlook, it’d be 
September 25–26, 2018
107 of 153


 
 
 
appropriate to increase the funds rate in September.  Well, now it’s September, and the incoming 
data have been in line with what I expected, or even better.  Overall financial conditions remain 
quite supportive of growth, and I continue to project solid growth in real activity over the 
medium term.  With the economy operating above potential for the remainder of this decade, I 
expect underlying measures of inflation to rise gradually, moving modestly above 2 percent 
by 2020. 
Uncertainty associated with my projections is aligned with historical norms.  And, in 
light of the sustained ongoing strength in the economy and the realized firming of inflation, our 
strategy of gradually raising rates has served us well in the past and remains appropriate now and 
for some time into the future.  I anticipate that it’ll be appropriate to raise the target funds rate to 
a level moderately above my assessment of its longer-run value, which I continue to put at 2½ 
percent.  Such a policy rate path is designed to support ongoing economic expansion while 
minimizing the risks of overheating in terms of either inflation or risks and imbalances in 
financial markets.  Although I am confident that we’re on the right path, it is worth reminding 
ourselves that we don’t have much experience operating with such low levels of unemployment 
as we’re all projecting, and achieving the desired soft landing is easier said than done. 
As our policy stance approaches neutral territory, it makes sense to remove the reference 
to an “accommodative” stance, and here I agree with the comments of Governors Brainard, 
Quarles, and Clarida and others.  This language played a helpful role early in the normalization 
process, but retaining it would give the public the false perception that the Committee is 
confident in its ability to ascertain where neutral is, and that this demarcation is somehow pivotal 
to our decisionmaking.  As I mentioned in the past, I see no benefit of adopting alternative 
language that bridges us forward, such as “somewhat accommodative.”  Again, introducing such 
September 25–26, 2018
108 of 153


 
 
 
modifiers would lead to a misleading impression that the neutral rate, wherever that may be, is 
the primary determinant of our policy decisions.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks, everyone, for your comments.  I hear 
broad support for a 25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate and also 
consensus for removing the “accommodative” language, which I will attempt to communicate in 
a way that suggests there’s no signal in doing so.  And with that, I’m going to ask Jim Clouse to 
review what we’re going to vote on and then read the roll. 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The vote will be on the monetary policy 
statement as it appears on page 4 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials, and the vote will also 
encompass the directive to the Desk as it appears in the implementation note shown on pages 8 
and 9 of Thomas’s briefing materials. 
Chairman Powell  
 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Williams 
 
Yes 
Governor Clarida  
 
Yes 
President Barkin 
 
 
Yes 
President Bostic 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Brainard  
 
Yes 
President Mester 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Quarles  
 
Yes 
President George  
 
Yes 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Now we have two sets of related matters under the 
Board’s jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  So may I have 
a motion from a Board member to take the proposed action with respect to the interest rates on 
reserves as set forth in the first paragraph associated with policy alternative B on the last page of 
Thomas’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Can I have a second? 
September 25–26, 2018
109 of 153


 
 
 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Now may I have a motion 
from a Board member to take the proposed actions with respect to the primary credit rate and the 
rates for secondary and seasonal credit as set forth in the second paragraph associated with 
policy alternative B on the last page of Thomas’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  One other little piece of business I wanted 
to mention is that I’ve asked Rich to chair the subcommittee on communications and bring it 
back to life after a period of hiatus since Stan Fischer’s departure.  As you all know, the role of 
the subcommittee is to help prioritize and frame communications issues for the Committee and to 
reach out to all FOMC participants in identifying key themes and areas of common ground. 
The most recent membership of the subcommittee included former Governor Fischer, 
President Mester, then-President Williams, and yours truly.  And I want to thank all of you, 
except for myself [laughter], for your service and your many contributions. 
The appointment of a new chair for the subcommittee has typically involved a 
changeover for the other members of the subcommittee, and that practice has been helpful in 
bringing new perspectives on board.  So the newly constituted committee will include Governor 
Brainard, President Rosengren, and President Kaplan.  And we look forward to hearing from this 
subcommittee at future meetings. 
With that, our final agenda item is to confirm that the next meeting will be on 
November 7 and 8.  It will be a relatively rare Wednesday–Thursday meeting, which means that 
you won’t have to submit an absentee ballot in the midterm elections.  It may be too early for 
September 25–26, 2018
110 of 153


 
 
 
lunch for some of you, but we do have boxed sandwiches, which are excellent, and salads in the 
next room. 
And thanks again, everybody.  Great meeting, and I look forward to seeing you soon.  
The meeting is adjourned. 
 END OF MEETING 
 
September 25–26, 2018
111 of 153
