SOURCE: FOMC20180613meeting.pdf
DATE: 20180613
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
1 of 185
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
June 12–13, 2018 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, 
D.C., on Tuesday, June 12, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 13, 2018, at 
9:00 a.m. 
PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Lael Brainard 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine,1 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, 
Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher,1 and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
1 Attended Tuesday session only. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
2 of 185
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment 
Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and 
Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial 
Stability, Board of Governors 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board 
of Governors 
Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board 
Members, Board of Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 
Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
John J. Stevens and Stacey Tevlin, Associate Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 
Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and 
Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Norman J. Morin, John Sabelhaus, and Paul A. Smith, Assistant 
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, 
Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
John Ammer,1 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 
Dan Li, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
3 of 185
Martin Bodenstein and Marcel A. Priebsch, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors; Logan T. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors; Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Marcelo Ochoa, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Jeff Fuhrer, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 
Marc Giannoni, Paolo A. Pesenti, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Roc Armenter, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
4 of 185
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
June 12–13, 2018 
June 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Why don’t we get started a little early?  If you have a cell 
phone, then please take my picture and then also turn yourself in for a violation.  [Laughter] But 
I would be remiss if I didn’t say, for the record, that this is the first time in 26 years that anyone 
has been able to sit in this chair who’s a Washington sports fan and congratulate a Washington 
team.  So congratulations to the Washington Capitals, whose Stanley Cup victory parade went by 
us just a couple of hours ago.  It’s a great day.  It’s something we try to do at least once every 
quarter-century.  [Laughter] 
I also want to congratulate—earnestly—Presidents Mester, Harker, Bostic, and Williams, 
whose teams in their Districts put up valiant, if wholly inadequate [laughter], efforts to stop the 
Capitals in their march to the Cup.  So, anyway, thank you very much.  [Puts Washington 
Capitals cap on head and then takes it off.]  And with that— 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER.  I was wondering when that was going to happen.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  No, I’m not going to wear that the whole time. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I like the beads. 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER.  The Mardi Gras beads were an anomaly. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL. All right. Let’s get started.  As usual, today’s FOMC meeting 
will be conducted as a joint meeting with the Board of Governors, and I’ll need a motion from a 
Board member to close the meeting. 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
June 12–13, 2018
5 of 185
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection. Great.  Also, before we get started, I would 
like to begin by noting that this is Bill Dudley’s last FOMC meeting.  Some of us will have more 
to say tonight about Bill’s contributions to the Federal Reserve System at the reception.  But I’d 
like to say a few words here at the FOMC meeting. 
Bill has had a remarkable professional journey, which actually began here at the Board in 
1981. He then embarked on a successful career on Wall Street.  Whether it was wisdom, 
prescience, or some unidentified third factor [laughter]—more on that tonight—Bill returned to 
his Federal Reserve roots just in time to play a central role in the response to the financial crisis: 
first, as a manager of the Desk, and then in his current role as president of the New York Fed. 
This is his 92nd regularly scheduled FOMC meeting.  And even more impressive—and, 
no doubt, more harrowing—were the 18 unscheduled meetings in which he played a part. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That many? 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Yes.  Bill’s deep experience in finance, economics, and the 
ways of Wall Street—paired with his keen intellect, strong work ethic, calm demeanor, and good 
humor—have proven to be invaluable to the Federal Reserve and, indeed, to the national and 
international economy.  Bill, you’ve been a terrific colleague.  You’ll be sorely missed.  We wish 
you the very best in all of your future endeavors. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to leave my 
comments until the end of the day tomorrow, as is traditional. Obviously, I’ll have something to 
say this evening as well.  I’m going to hold in abeyance until tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  And for now, we will applaud.  [Applause] 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
6 of 185
I’m also sorry, for all of our sakes, to say that this will be Steve Meyer’s last FOMC 
meeting before he retires this summer.  Steve has had a long, distinguished career here, in 
academia and at the Federal Reserve System.  He started his economics career teaching at the 
Wharton School, and he continues to teach there on an adjunct basis.  He then joined the 
Philadelphia Fed’s research department for a 23-year career. We were fortunate enough to 
attract Steve to the Board in 2008, and he has played a vital role here in helping us craft, among 
other things, the effective communication that is so central to good monetary policy.  He has 
attended 79 FOMC meetings. Steve, we will miss your creativity and wisdom and your near-
total obsession with the clarity of FOMC statements. [Laughter] We wish you all the best as 
well.  Thank you, Steve. [Applause] 
And with that, let’s turn to Simon and Lorie for the Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I start the formal briefing, I 
would like to say a few words about the Vice Chair.  Over the past 11 years or so, 
Bill, first as manager and then as president, has made a number of critical and lasting 
contributions to the Desk’s work.  I would categorize them into three buckets: 
operational innovation; drawing unique holistic insights drawn from market analysis; 
and broadening our outreach for market intelligence. 
Bill, during the financial crisis and after, was a thought leader in designing 
innovative operations to meet the direct and indirect needs of households and firms.  
The TALF in particular stands out in this respect.  Working with Bill over the past 
11 years, the number of critical insights he has had are far too many to discuss today, 
but one that has had a continuing effect on me—and I look back at for motivation— 
was his first Desk briefing in January 2007, in which subprime was the focus. 
Finally, from the moment Bill arrived at the New York Fed, he thought the Desk was 
too narrowly focused on obtaining market intelligence from the sell side.  He has 
greatly increased our intelligence activities with the buy side and new market players. 
A recent example is the Desk’s outreach to quantitative strategy funds last year, 
which allowed us to have excellent intelligence regarding the volatility spike on 
February 5.  From everyone at the Desk, thank you, Bill.  We will miss you. 
Market focus over the intermeeting period was largely centered on international 
developments—in particular, heightened concern about vulnerabilities in emerging 
markets and Italy. U.S. asset prices were buffeted by some of these developments.  
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
7 of 185
However, contacts continued to express confidence in the trajectory of the U.S. 
economy, and financial conditions ended little changed over the period.  Shown in the 
top-left panel of your first exhibit, Treasury yields are slightly lower on net, while the 
dollar appreciated around 2 percent.  The S&P 500 index rose over 4 percent and the 
VIX declined as market participants pointed to the positive domestic economic 
backdrop and its implications for corporate earnings, as well as a rebound in prices of 
technology-sector shares. 
In the first few weeks following the May FOMC meeting, market participants 
were largely focused on rising U.S. Treasury yields and a strengthening dollar and 
their effects on the demand for emerging market assets.  As shown in the top-right 
panel, the 10-year Treasury yield rose above 3.1 percent to levels last observed in the 
middle of 2011.  Market participants primarily attributed the increase in Treasury 
yields to ongoing strength in the U.S. economy, particularly following the April retail 
sales release on May 15.  Yields in other advanced economies did not track U.S. 
yields higher during this time, as a result of divergence in the strength of recent 
economic data prints in the United States and abroad, as discussed at our previous 
meeting.  This divergence was highlighted by market participants as contributing to 
broad dollar appreciation over the period. 
Though emerging market currencies have been under pressure since mid-April, 
there was increased attention on potential vulnerabilities during this intermeeting 
period.  The light blue bars in the middle-left panel show the notable depreciation in 
major EM currencies since the May FOMC meeting. Indeed, EM currencies were the 
largest contributors to the 2 percent appreciation in the trade-weighted dollar, shown 
in the dark blue bars.  Consistent with the price response observed during previous 
bouts of emerging market pressure, underperformance was led by Turkey and 
Argentina—countries with large current account deficits, thin reserve cushions, 
elevated inflation, and market concerns about policy credibility.  More recently, 
attention turned to Brazil and Mexico, which came under pressure because of 
approaching elections in which antiestablishment candidates lead in the polls. The 
Mexican peso depreciated around 7 percent and is the largest single contributor to the 
appreciation in the trade-weighted dollar over the period. Pressure on the peso was 
further compounded by an escalation of trade tensions with the United States, and 
market participants will be highly attentive to the results of the Mexican elections on 
July 1 and any consequences that these may have on the likelihood of successfully 
concluding NAFTA negotiations. 
Market participants also pointed to the unwinding of crowded long-positioning in 
EM currencies as perhaps exacerbating the recent depreciation, particularly in the 
peso, as shown in the middle-right panel.  In general, the reappearance of U.S. dollar 
strength has surprised many market participants. 
In recent weeks, European political risks also came to the fore, with substantial 
widening of Italian sovereign spreads to German equivalents.  As shown by the dark 
blue line in the bottom-left panel, the most notable moves were in the two-year tenor, 
which reached 350 basis points, approaching the highest levels observed since the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
8 of 185
European debt crisis.  This widening started alongside news that Italian 
antiestablishment parties had formed a coalition, but the most pronounced moves 
occurred following the Italian president’s rejection for office of a proposed 
Euroskeptic finance minister, which was seen as increasing the probability of a new 
general election that might center on Italy’s future in the European Union and euro 
area.  The rise in the Italian 2-year spread on May 29 was the largest one-day increase 
ever observed, and the move in the Italian 10-year spread was the largest since 2008.  
Much of the widening in Italian spreads has since retraced as the coalition 
successfully formed a government, reducing the likelihood of general elections in the 
near term. 
Market participants noted that the historically outsized moves in Italian spreads 
were exacerbated by low liquidity.  Indeed, the bid-ask spread on the two-year Italian 
government bond, the red line in the bottom-left panel, rose to its highest level since 
2012. Although we did observe spillover arising from the heightened political risk in 
Italy into broader euro-area and global financial markets, other peripheral spreads to 
German equivalents widened only modestly and have since almost fully retraced. 
Amid concern about Italian political developments, Treasury yields were 
temporarily affected, declining as many as 16 basis points on May 29—the largest 
decline since the day following the Brexit referendum.  The bottom-right panel looks 
at changes in the 10-year Treasury yield against moves in Italian peripheral spreads, 
highlighting the move on May 29, in red, against observations dating from the height 
of the European debt crisis.  The move in the Treasury yield appears to be in line with 
previous patterns, suggesting continued strong transmission from euro-area concerns 
to the United States. 
Another area in which the reaction was pronounced as well as sustained was in 
euro-area banks, on account of their exposure to Italy.  As shown in the top-left panel 
of your second exhibit, share prices of euro-area banks declined notably as political 
pressures in Italy mounted over the period, with the broader index roughly 14 percent 
lower, significantly underperforming U.S. banks.  Italian bank share prices fell over 
20 percent because of their higher holdings of Italian sovereign debt and concerns 
that banking-sector fragility would necessitate support provided by the Italian 
government, further threatening fiscal sustainability—the so-called doom loop. 
Following the volatility in Italian spreads and weak euro-area data over recent 
months, some market participants expected the ECB to delay a discussionabout the 
future of its purchase program and shift out the timing of rate normalization. Rates 
on EURIBOR futures contracts implied that the timing of a 15 basis point increase 
was pushed out about one quarter from the third to fourth quarter of 2019 as shown in 
the top-right panel.  However, market participants interpreted comments by ECB 
officials the week following the height of Italian spread volatility as suggesting a 
higher level of confidence on the part of the ECB with regard to the inflation outlook 
and prospect for policy normalization.  In response, the path of the policy rate 
steepened and retraced earlier moves and once again prices in a rate hike in the third 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
9 of 185
quarter of next year.  Market participants are very attentive to the outcome of the 
ECB meeting in two days’ time. 
The market-implied path of the federal funds rate was little changed on net 
despite notable fluctuations over the period.  The flattening of the path observed 
within the period largely occurred on two discrete events captured by the dark blue 
portion of the bars in the middle-left panel:  following the FOMC meeting minutes 
and heightened Italian political uncertainty.  Although the May FOMC minutes were 
viewed as consistent with a rate hike at this meeting, the language regarding an 
overshoot to inflation, coupled with the potential change to the interest rate on 
reserves relative to the top of the target range, led to a modest decline in policy-
sensitive rates.  However, much of the flattening retraced over the past two weeks, as 
shown in the light blue portion of the bars, following an abatement of Italian political 
risks, the stronger-than-expected May U.S. employment report, and comments by 
ECB officials. 
Expectations of the path of policy rate in the June Desk surveys were similarly 
little changed from May.  As shown in the change from the light blue to dark blue 
diamonds in the middle-right panel, the average probability-weighted expectation for 
the target federal funds rate increased slightly over the forecast horizon.  Broadly, 
survey respondents do not expect a change to the median March SEP dots, denoted as 
the rose-colored circles in the panel, with the median June SEP 2018 dot expected to 
imply two additional 25 basis point increases in the target range.  Looking at the 
distribution of expectations in the Desk survey, roughly one-third of respondents 
expect the median dot to show four hikes this year.  Of those who expect it to show 
three total rate hikes this year, most view the balance of risks for their expectations as 
tilted to the upside.  However some survey respondents noted that concerns about 
trade-related and international developments temper that upside risk somewhat.   
Using our survey data since last May, the bottom-left panel decomposes the 
difference between the median SEP dot and the market-implied federal funds rate for 
year-end 2019.  This calculation is done by splitting the overall difference into three 
subcomponents: the spread between the SEP and survey mode; the survey mode and 
survey mean; and, finally, the survey mean and market-implied rate. The net 
difference between the SEP median and market pricing, represented by the red dots, 
has narrowed as the horizon has shortened.  The light blue components across the 
bars show the spread between the median SEP dot and the median modal expectation 
of the federal funds rate in the Desk’s surveys, which has converged and remained 
negligible over recent months.  The dark blue areas of the bars depict the spread 
between the survey mean and market pricing, which turned negative following the 
November 2017 survey. The higher market-implied rate relative to survey 
expectations would imply, contrary to staff model-based measures, that short-tenor 
term premiums have been positive since December.  The gray portions of the bars 
illustrate the spread between the survey mode and unconditional mean expectation for 
the policy rate, which has remained materially wide and positive.  This dynamic 
suggests that market participants have consistently viewed the distribution of risk 
around their modal path for the policy rate as skewed to the downside.  This 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
10 of 185
prevalence of downside risk to policy rate forecasts may in part be due to persistent 
perceptions of skew toward lower levels of inflation. 
As shown in the bottom-right panel, although expectations for PCE inflation two 
to three years ahead have shifted moderately higher since late last year, respondents 
on average still assign a higher probability to outcomes 1.75 percent or lower versus 
above 2.25 percent.  Lorie will continue the briefing. 
MS. LOGAN. Thank you, Simon.  I’ll begin on exhibit 3 by first summarizing 
recent changes in Treasury bill supply and money market spreads and recapping the 
market reaction to the discussion in the minutes of a possible technical adjustment to 
the IOR rate. Next, I’ll discuss Desk survey respondents’ expectations regarding the 
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the supply of reserves in the longer 
run, both of which increased since the December survey.  Finally, I’ll touch on a few 
operational topics, including MBS operational readiness and reference rate updates. 
The dark blue line in the top-left panel shows that although Treasury bill supply is 
little changed since the May FOMC meeting, it has given back about one-third of the 
increase in issuance seen during the first quarter.  Consequently, as demonstrated by 
the light blue line, the spread between the three-month bill rate and the comparable 
OIS rate—the latter of which reflects the expected path of the effective federal funds 
rate—has declined slightly from its recent highs but remains elevated by historical 
standards. 
At the same time, as shown in the top-right panel, the spread between three-month 
LIBOR and the comparable OIS rate narrowed from a peak of about 60 basis points 
in early April to roughly 40 basis points.  This represents a retracement of about half 
of its run-up during the first quarter, but the current spread sits just above the peak 
observed around the time of money fund reform. 
Meanwhile, as shown by the gray line in the middle-left panel, the spread between 
the overnight triparty repo rate and the overnight RRP offering rate has not retraced 
and remains quite elevated compared with last year. As Treasury bills and repo are 
close substitutes, higher bill supply and rates tend to put upward pressure on repo 
rates.  Additionally, increased issuance of Treasury coupon securities, which are often 
funded by repo, may also be contributing to higher repo rates and volumes. 
Reflecting the continued attractiveness and availability of bills and repo as investment 
alternatives, overnight RRP take-up remains low, averaging just $6 billion per day 
over the intermeeting period, as shown in the middle-right panel. 
Coming back to the middle-left panel for a moment, you can see that the 
overnight Treasury repo rate—again, the gray line—also continues to trade near or 
above the effective federal funds rate, the light blue line.  This configuration is 
important because the FHLBs, which provide about 95 percent of federal funds loans 
and can’t earn IOER, have shifted investments from federal funds to repo because of 
the relatively higher rates.  As you can see in the bottom-left panel, not only have the 
FHLBs increased their repo activity over recent months, but a significant portion of 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
11 of 185
their repo lending has occurred at rates above the effective federal funds rate.  As 
discussed in the previous Desk briefing, this shift may have contributed to the recent 
narrowing in the spread between the federal funds and IOER rates. 
Since that time, the effective rate has been printing at 1.7 percent, with the 
fed-funds-to-IOER spread remaining at negative 5 basis points.  The distribution of 
trading in federal funds has been dense around the median, as shown in the bottom-
right panel, potentially indicating that the risk of an abrupt adjustment in the effective 
rate is low at this time. 
Market participants were highly attentive to the discussion in the May FOMC 
minutes of the fed-funds-to-IOER spread and the potential technical adjustment of 
IOR relative to the target range.  Although contacts expressed some surprise with the 
discussion, the communication appeared to be well understood. 
In view of already high expectations for a rate hike at this meeting, market 
participants widely interpreted the minutes to suggest that the possible technical 
adjustment will be implemented in June.  Although the implied rate on the July 
federal funds contract declined only 3.5 basis points around the time of publication of 
the minutes, most contacts indicated that they expect that the effective rate will 
remain 5 basis points below IOER, at least initially, following the implementation of 
such an adjustment. 
Looking further ahead, market participants expect the federal-funds-rate-to-IOER 
spread will continue narrowing, driven by a range of factors, including ongoing 
Treasury supply dynamics and the expected removal of an FDIC fee later this year.  
Additionally, while market participants have not widely cited the reduction in 
reserves to date as putting upward pressure on the effective rate, they have broadly 
indicated expectations that the continued decline in reserves will contribute to firming 
pressures. One way in which we might interpret these expectations could be that 
market participants implicitly believe the Committee will allow reserves to decline to 
a level at which they become somewhat scarce and consequently rise in price. 
Your fourth exhibit focuses on the balance sheet.  The Desk’s surveys asked 
respondents to provide updated expectations for the size and composition of the 
Federal Reserve balance sheet, on average, in 2025, conditional on not moving to the 
effective lower bound between now and then. 
As shown by the red diamonds in the top-left panel, the median respondent 
expects total assets of around $3.6 trillion.  The median forecast was only slightly 
higher than in December, but the light blue circles show more high values. 
This shift was largely accounted for by higher expected levels of reserves. The 
top-right panel demonstrates that roughly two-thirds of respondents who provided 
complete answers when this question was last asked in December increased their 
expected average level of reserves in 2025. The average change was $270 billion, 
and 16 of 35 respondents increased their expectations by more than $250 billion. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
12 of 185
To better understand their views, we asked respondents to explain any changes to 
their expectations since December as well as the assumptions that underlie their 
current expectations.  However, most respondents did not provide substantive details, 
and a few who did comment emphasized the high degree of uncertainty surrounding 
their expectations.  That said, a few respondents specifically alluded to the recent 
narrowing in the fed-funds-to-IOER spread or the discussion of the technical 
adjustment or both as shaping the change in their view. 
We used these updated expectations, along with the interest rate forecasts in the 
surveys, as inputs to SOMA portfolio projections akin to those we’ve published 
previously.  The middle-left panel compares results using June survey data, the solid 
lines, to those using the December survey, the dashed lines, illustrating how the 
portfolio could evolve under three alternative liabilities scenarios. 
Taking into account the updated inputs, particularly the higher expected average 
levels of reserves in 2025, the timing of normalization for the size of the balance 
sheet occurs earlier in each of the liabilities scenarios shown. In the larger-liabilities 
scenario, which is based on the 75th percentile of survey responses for each liability 
line item and a number of additional assumptions, normalization occurs in June 
2019—eight months earlier than in the December projection. You can see this in the 
solid dark blue line in the middle-left panel and in the first row of the table in the 
middle-right panel.  The middle-right panel further summarizes the implied 
normalization timing and expected level of reserves associated with each of the 
scenarios. As you can see, the results vary significantly. The median and smaller 
liabilities scenarios imply that the size normalizes at the end of 2020 and the 
beginning of 2022, respectively. 
Regarding more immediate balance sheet projections, as shown in the bottom-left 
panel, using Desk models, MBS reinvestment purchases are projected to slow 
significantly in July and then cease in October.  However, there is substantial 
uncertainty regarding these projections because MBS principal payments are highly 
dependent upon long-term interest rates and various other factors.  Of note, 
projections of MBS principal payments are also subject to forecast errors that can 
result from different model specifications.  For example, ahead of the June 
reinvestment period, our models had forecast MBS principal payments to total about 
$17.7 billion to $20.7 billion, while the final estimate came in higher at about $22.5 
billion. 
As summarized in the bottom-right panel and discussed in a recent staff memo, 
under the current reinvestment policy and directive, if actual principal payments were 
to exceed the $20 billion cap before the size of the balance sheet is normalized, the 
Desk would engage in MBS reinvestment purchases.  Specifically, as currently 
directed, the Desk would reinvest in agency MBS the amount by which the principal 
payments received on agency debt and MBS during any month exceed $20 billion.  
Although the probability of this occurring is difficult to judge, various models 
indicate a nontrivial likelihood that principal payments will exceed the cap during one 
or more months between the fourth quarter of this year and the end of 2020. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
13 of 185
To maintain appropriate readiness, the Desk intends to conduct small-value MBS 
purchases of up to $300 million per month for some time after principal payments 
first fall below the cap. The Desk will review the size and frequency of these test 
operations over time and update the Committee as necessary.  The Desk intends to 
communicate this plan in a manner similar to other communications on small-value 
operations.  In terms of timing, the June FOMC minutes could be followed with a 
Desk statement and updated FAQs later in the summer that would provide specific 
details about how the Desk will inform the public whether it’s conducting 
reinvestment operations or small-value test operations in the coming month. 
Your fifth exhibit summarizes a few reference rate updates.  First:  “A Federal 
Register Notice was issued in mid-May requesting public comment on revised 
instructions to the FR 2420 report to capture onshore overnight wholesale borrowing 
activity in the production of the overnight bank funding rate.”  Second:  “On May 7, 
the CME launched one-month and three-month futures on the Secured Overnight 
Financing Rate, one of the Fed’s new overnight Treasury repo rates and the rate the 
Alternative Reference Rates Committee selected as its recommended alternative to 
U.S. dollar LIBOR for use in certain derivatives contracts.” Third:  “Over the 
upcoming intermeeting period, the New York Fed plans to update its Statement of 
Compliance with the IOSCO Principles for Financial Benchmarks to include the three 
overnight Treasury repo reference rates.  The statement was initially issued in January 
to cover the EFFR and OBFR.” Relatedly, the New York Fed released its Statement 
of Commitment to the FX Global Code on May 24, and each of our FX counterparties 
has also committed to the code. 
Finally, the appendix contains a list of all the small-value exercises conducted 
over the intermeeting period, including a test TDF operation, along with a list of 
upcoming exercises.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That concludes our prepared 
remarks.  We would be happy to take any questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you, Simon and Lorie.  Questions for Simon and Lorie? 
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  A question for Lorie.  The reinvestment program has worked out 
very well.  For the MBS, if we were to make an announcement that we no longer thought we 
needed caps for the MBS, what do you think the market reaction to that kind of announcement 
would be, in view of the fact that you’re projecting that it’s relatively unlikely that we would be 
hitting the caps anyway, and the fact that we have argued that we want to move toward a 
Treasury-securities-only portfolio? Do you think it would be disruptive, underyour projections, 
to eliminate that cap? 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
14 of 185
MS. LOGAN. When we did some surveys very early when the reinvestment policy was 
first announced, I think the expectation was something on the order of the MBS spread widening 
around 20 basis points. 
My sense, on the basis of talking with market participants, is that the plan that’s been 
announced so far hasn’t fully been priced in to that MBS spread, that we’re somewhere less than 
that full 20 basis points as yet.  So I suspect that there’s still some room to go even under the 
current plan.  I think if you were to announce an adjustment, there would likely be some further 
widening in that MBS spread, because you’re changing the distribution of potential outcomes, 
particularly if interest rates were to fall.  So you’re putting more of that convexity risk back to 
the market. It’s hard to know what the order of magnitude of that would be, but I would expect 
some amount of widening. 
I would say, though, that on the market-functioning side, I think the MBS market is 
functioning quite well.  Liquidity seems to be generally strong, even as the amount of 
reinvestments is expected to come down. 
MR. POTTER. It’s not a surprise that we’re projecting we’ll be under the cap.  The 
construction was to give market participants some understanding that if interest rates dropped a 
lot, a large amount of mortgages would prepay, but, after a certain point, the caps would bind 
and we would reinvest.  That was the design made last year, and that’s still true.  I think the one 
difference is, our estimates may be a little bit higher under current interest rates of how many 
paydowns we’ll get. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL. Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Somewhat related to President Rosengren’s question, with regard to 
the small-value monthly purchases, just to keep the pipes clear—how will you know when that’s 


 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
15 of 185
no longer necessary? I mean, will it be a Potter Stewart situation—you know it when you see it? 
Or is there a test that would allow you to say, we no longer need to do this? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think our sense is that we’ll learn something from doing those 
operational readiness tests over time, and we’ll be able to change the amount so that we’re not 
doing as much.  And if things are continuing to progress well, we can lower that amount or 
potentially even remove doing that, or not do it every month.  So I think we’ll be able to come 
back to the Committee after the first couple of months and say whether continuing would be 
needed. 
I think the risk of needing to reinvest again is likely to be the highest around the summer 
months, because that’s when the prepays tend to rise.  The summer might be another good 
opportunity to revisit that question, because if we don’t see those reinvestments in the summer in 
2019, I think that would be another good opportunity to reconsider that small-value test. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  I have questions.  Lorie, this reestimation of the size of the 
balance sheet at which reserves become scarce is pretty big.  I wonder, can you elaborate on that 
a little more.  I think you said it had to do with the fact that IOER was trading closer to RRP.  
What do you think’s going on? 
MS. LOGAN.  In the survey we asked the respondents to describe both their assumptions 
and what might have driven those changes, but there were only a handful of respondents who 
provided clear answers.  And the clear answers that we got were the two that I noted. One was 
just that the federal funds rate moving higher in the range may have sparked thoughts that the 
amount of reserves in the system that are needed may be larger, or that the discussion of the 
technical adjustment, or perhaps even that the long-run framework discussions they’ve been 
hearing may have influenced that.  But I would be skeptical, because it was only a couple of 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
16 of 185
respondents, and generally we didn’t get very good qualitative responses to either of those two 
questions from most of the people who replied. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Just to be clear:  Were there only a couple of respondents on 
the change in the size, or only a couple that provided explanations? 
MS. LOGAN.  Only a couple that provided explanations.  On the change in size, the 
numbers are under the chart.  We did the match samples for those who replied, both in December 
and in June.  With respect to the change, I think that was pretty notable across a lot of 
respondents. 
With respect to the actual qualitative responses, it was very small.  If we had to infer 
what may also be driving things—with actual facts not being obtainable from the survey—my 
sense is that there were a number of strategists who did more detailed analysis over this and the 
previous intermeeting period, and it could be some sort of echo effect, in which people have read 
those analyses by some notable strategists and have consequently started to change or inform 
their thinking. 
I think another possibility is, as we’ve talked more about what the floor system might 
look like, they’ve thought about what type of buffer may be required, and maybe they hadn’t 
thought about that earlier last year. But those are just guesses based on what we’re seeing; we 
didn’t see it in the survey results that I described. 
MR. POTTER. Let me just add that this doesn’t necessarily mean reserves are scarce at 
the number they are given in that survey, because if it’s a floor system, reserves wouldn’t be 
scarce. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Right.  Understood. 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
17 of 185
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Part of this issue is that this was never very well nailed 
down, how much excess reserves you’re going to need in the system to keep the federal funds 
rate trading where you want it to trade.  So any new piece of information can perturb that 
expectation quite a bit, because no one really actually knows.  And I think the thing that makes it 
so hard to know is, we have a new set of regulations with respect to liquidity that may have 
altered the demand for reserves in ways that we don’t fully appreciate.  So I would imagine that 
this is going to continue to move around as we get little pieces of information that inform 
people’s judgment, just because we’re starting with a pretty broad range of possible outcomes. 
MS. LOGAN.  And you can see that in the width of the expectations.  It’s a very wide set 
for those numbers. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD. Yes.  Just further on that point, I’ve certainly heard a variety of 
market participants suggesting that perhaps supervised entities are likely to keep more of their 
HQLA in reserves than perhaps we had anticipated.  Do you have any way of assessing whether 
that hypothesis is true? 
MS. LOGAN.  We’ve started some systematic outreach to the banks, and we’ve done that 
through interviews and also on the basis of notes written by the supervisors.  And of the 18 banks 
that we’ve looked at, we’ve gotten a sense of what they see as their minimum cash amounts.  In 
other words, what amount they would pay out to maintain that level of reserves. 
And we’ve learned something from that.  I think that the regulations have changed the 
way they think about holding reserves—maybe not because of an explicit piece of the regulation, 
but maybe because of an implicit sense of the regulation—for example, whether they can 
monetize the other HQLA, which, of course, you wouldn’t have to with reserves. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
18 of 185
In the case of the banks that we’ve talked to, another thing that I think that is affecting 
some of it is intraday payments.  In the case of those large institutions that may be dealing with 
large payment flows, they think about the need for holding reserves relative to those payments a 
lot differently than they did pre-crisis.  So a firm like that would be asking for a much larger 
minimum level of reserves. 
I think that it is definitely true that the supervisory structure has affected the way that 
banks will be thinking about reserves, and market participants are starting to add those numbers 
up, and that may be influencing some of these numbers as well. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Further questions?  [No response]  If not, we need a 
motion to ratify the domestic open market operations conducted since the May meeting.  Do I 
have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? [No response] 
Thanks very much.  Next we’ll turn to the review of the economic and financial situation.  And 
in the interest of tinkering with our meeting format, we will have the domestic and international 
briefings, followed by Q&A, and then the SEP briefing, followed by Q&A.  Norm, take us away.   
MR. MORIN.2  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the materials titled “Material for 
Staff Presentation on the Economic and Financial Situation.” I’ll start with a brief 
overview of the staff projection, comparing aspects of the projection to the December 
2017 forecast.  Then I will address a question that some of you have raised—namely, 
the different signal about resource tightness being sent by manufacturing capacity 
utilization compared with the staff’s broader measures of resource use: the output and 
unemployment gaps. 
Let’s turn to your first exhibit. In our projection, as shown to the left, output 
continues to expand at an above-trend pace through next year before slowing to its 
potential growth rate in 2020, as monetary policy tightens further.  As shown in the 
right panel, compared with the December Tealbook, real GDP growth is about 
0.5 percentage point faster this year and next and about unrevised in 2020.  As shown 
2 The materials used by Messrs. Morin and Kamin are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
19 of 185
in red, our estimates of the effect of the tax cuts and spending package more than 
account for the revisions in 2018 and 2019.  For growth in 2020, these larger fiscal 
policy effects are essentially offset by other factors:  financial conditions (in green), 
which include the higher path of the exchange rate; small effects of oil prices (in light 
blue); and our assumption of supply constraints (in blue).  As shown in red in the 
bottom-left panel, the latest reading on spending in May that we construct using 
information supplied to us by First Data support our view of a rebound in PCE 
growth from its Q1 lull. 
In your next slide, I turn to the labor market.  The two employment reports 
received since the May FOMC meeting point to the labor market continuing to 
tighten and by a little more than we had expected.  The unemployment rate declined 
0.3 percentage point over that period, to 3.8 percent in May—its lowest level since 
1969. As displayed in the upper left, jobless rates have continued to decline across 
most races and ethnicities.  Shown to the right, prime-age labor force participation, 
the black line, has improved, and even more so relative to its declining trend.  
Although the data are quite volatile, participation rates appear to be generally rising 
across races and ethnicities. 
The blue line in the bottom-left panel plots our alternative estimate of private 
employment gains that combines BLS private employment (in red) with a measure we 
construct using ADP’s company-level data (in black).  This alternative measure, 
which provides our best estimate of private job gains, has run around 175,000 the past 
few months. 
Moving to the right, we expect the unemployment rate to move down into 2019 
and to move sideways in 2020, when output increases roughly with potential.  The 
revision to the unemployment rate since the December Tealbook is smaller than one 
would expect in light of the revision to real GDP.  We have attenuated the decline in 
the unemployment rate because we assume that in an extremely tight labor market, a 
larger-than-usual amount of tightening in resource utilization will manifest in a higher 
labor force participation rate, as individuals are drawn into the labor force. 
Regarding inflation, as shown in your next slide, the 12-month changes in April 
for total PCE prices, 2 percent, and for core PCE prices, 1.8 percent, were one-tenth 
lower than expected.  The downward surprise was concentrated in nonmarket prices, 
a component that carries essentially no signal about future price changes.  As shown 
to the right, we forecast both total and core inflation to move up a bit over the next 
few months, with the larger rise in total PCE inflation reflecting the increases in oil 
prices. 
In the table to the right, the first and third rows show our forecast as it stood last 
night.  In this morning’s CPI release for May, the core and topline indexes both 
increased 0.2 percent. In response to this information, we’ve revised up our estimate 
of core PCE inflation in May by a few basis points.  As a result, our forecast of 
12-month core inflation in each of June and September now rounds up to 2 percent, in 
contrast to the 1.9 percent shown on line 3 of the table, and our forecast of topline 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
20 of 185
PCE inflation, shown on line 1, is unrevised in June and up one-tenth to 2.1 percent in 
September. The May increase in PCE prices remains no more than a forecast, 
because we won’t have the relevant PPI components until tomorrow morning and 
won’t have the nonmarket prices until the BEA publishes its May estimate at the end 
of this month. 
Your next slide shows our medium-term projection of inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation is projected to edge up from 1.9 percent this year to 2.1 percent in 2020, 
which, as shown to the left, is a bit above our estimate of its underlying trend.  As 
shown in red to the right, the projected rise in inflation above its trend mainly reflects 
the further tightening of resource utilization that more than offsets restraint arising 
from a projected deceleration in core import prices (in green).  Core inflation in 2020 
also includes a small boost resulting from our assumed supply constraints. 
Total PCE prices, shown in the bottom left, are expected to increase 2.1 percent 
this year.  If we compare the bars, PCE price inflation this year has been marked up 
since December but is little changed for the period ahead.  And to the right, the 
sizable upward revision this year mainly reflects higher energy prices and a slightly 
higher core PCE projection; 2020 is marked up a little, in order to reflect the supply 
constraints that I mentioned. 
The black line in the top left of your next slide shows that federal debt as 
a percent of GDP has grown substantially in recent years, and the staff projects an 
increasing ratio in the coming years (the red line).  In forecasting developments over 
the long term, however, the staff assumes that the debt-to-GDP ratio will be 
stabilized.  I’ll illustrate with a simple example the magnitude of the deficit reduction 
implicit in this assumption. 
As shown in the middle, the change in the debt-to-GDP ratio depends on the size 
of the primary deficit (the deficit excluding interest payments) relative to GDP and 
the difference between the effective interest rate on federal debt and nominal GDP 
growth.  Assuming that the effective interest rate is about equal to nominal GDP 
growth—which it has been historically, on average—the debt-to-GDP ratio stabilizes 
when primary deficits are zero. 
Shown to the right, the blue portions of the bars represent the size of the primary 
deficits over the forecast period, which move up to 3 percent of GDP in 2019 and 
2020. The solid blue portion is the primary deficit excluding the TCJA and BBA; the 
effect of the deficits on the TCJA and the BBA are the hatched portions.  Note that 
we assume for 2020 the appropriation caps will remain constant in real terms, though 
the BBA expires at the end of fiscal year 2019. 
If primary deficits persist at 3 percent, then stabilizing the debt-to-GDP ratio will 
require deficit reductions approximately equal in magnitude to reversing the recent 
spending increases and tax cuts, plus eliminating the portion of the primary deficit 
excluding these legislative changes, which itself is equivalent in size to a reduction of 
a second TCJA. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
21 of 185
Let’s turn now to your next slide.  The output gap and the gap between the 
unemployment rate and its natural rate—two of the staff’s estimates of resource 
utilization—have tracked each other closely over time, in part because potential 
output and the natural rate of unemployment are not derived independently.  To make 
direct comparisons easier in this chart, I normalized these measures by dividing each 
gap by its standard deviation, and I inverted the unemployment gap.  Their positions 
relative to the horizontal line at zero reflect the number of standard deviations that 
each is from its neutral level.  For example, the output gap, which ends 2020 at about 
3 percent, is shown by the blue line to be just over a standard deviation above its 
neutral level at that point, and the inverted unemployment rate gap (in red) is just 
under a standard deviation past its natural rate. 
A third measure, shown in black, is our measure of manufacturing capacity 
utilization relative to an estimate of its long-run “neutral” level.  Unlike the other two 
measures, manufacturing capacity utilization pertains to resource use in about only 
12 percent of the economy.  However, it is estimated independently of the other 
measures. 
From the mid-1960s through the early 1990s, the capacity utilization gap closely 
tracks the other gap measures.  Since then, however, the manufacturing utilization 
gap has mostly tracked below the output and unemployment gaps.  All three measures 
fell sharply during the Great Recession and subsequently recovered, but the 
utilization gap has been moving roughly sideways since 2012, even as the broader 
gap measures have tightened past their estimated neutral levels.  Over the projection 
period, the difference grows into the largest “gap in the gaps” on record. 
In the next few slides I will explore some of the causes of this divergence to better 
understand the degree of tightness in the economy.  Although the reported capacity 
utilization rate remains low, labor in manufacturing appears stretched.  The average 
workweek of manufacturing production workers, shown in the left panel, is running at 
levels not seen since World War II, and overtime hours, not shown, are also elevated. 
The survey of plant capacity, from which we derive our estimates of capacity 
utilization, asks plant managers why they are operating at less than full capacity.  Not 
surprisingly, the most common response is always “lack of demand.”  The second 
most common reason, shown to the right, is “insufficient supply of local labor or 
skills,” which has risen sharply the past few years to around its highest levels since 
the late 1970s.  These indicators suggest that manufacturing could have a harder time 
expanding than the low levels of capacity utilization would indicate. 
On your next slide, even as there is evidence that labor resources in 
manufacturing are stretched, plant hours are below historical norms.  The panel to the 
left, also using the survey of plant capacity, shows the number of hours per week that 
factories are operating.  Plants producing nondurable goods (the blue line) are 
currently running about 120 hours per week, a typical level for these producers.  The 
black line shows weekly plant hours for durable goods producers outside 
transportation equipment.  During the Great Recession, the work period of these 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
22 of 185
plants fell 20 hours below pre-recession levels and has only recovered somewhat. 
This decline and recovery is equivalent to about half the plants dropping a shift 
during the recession and only half of those plants subsequently adding one back. 
Capacity utilization may be low because some plant managers are reporting a 
baseline for capacity that is consistent with “normal” pre-recession levels rather than 
their current state.  But if one assumes that the reduced plant hours in durable goods 
industries are the new normal, and they’re not going to return to pre-recession 
production patterns, capacity would be lower and overall manufacturing utilization 
rates currently would be about 4 percentage points higher.  The utilization gap would 
be nearing its neutral level, but the “gap in gaps” would nevertheless remain large. 
This and the previous exhibits suggest that factories are perhaps operating at a 
somewhat higher “short run” level of capacity utilization compared with the 
published figures.  With that in mind, I now explore the principal reason why 
manufacturing capacity utilization has failed to increase materially the past few years. 
Comparing the red and black lines in the left chart of the next slide, 
manufacturing IP and real GDP rose at essentially the same trend rate for decades, 
with IP showing larger cyclical swings.  During the Great Recession, manufacturing 
IP, as is typical, fell much further than real GDP.  But as shown in the table to the 
right, in the years following the recession, and despite GDP recovering at a 
historically subpar pace, manufacturing has grown only half as fast as GDP, widening 
the gap between the two. 
On your next slide, two trends appear to be weighing on domestic manufacturing.  
First, the chart on the left shows the goods and structures share of private domestic 
final demand.  As a result of the continuing shift to spending on services, the goods 
and structures share of domestic demand has dropped more than 15 percentage points 
the past few decades and continues to decline (within goods and structures, the 
durables and construction shares have been particularly low recently).  Further, as 
shown to the right, the staff’s flow-of-goods system shows the share of domestic 
demand that is satisfied by domestic production has also trended downward, falling 
about 20 percentage points since the mid-1970s. 
Your next slide actually shows something positive.  [Laughter]  The top edge of 
the black region in the chart to the left shows manufacturing output, which is 
decomposed into the contributions made by domestic demand and by exports.  The 
red area shows domestic production of goods that are consumed domestically.  At the 
end of 2017, domestic demand for domestic goods was only around the same level as 
20 years ago, in the mid-1990s.  The black region represents the contribution of 
exports to domestic manufacturing output.  As shown in the table to the right, exports 
account for nearly two-thirds of the growth in manufacturing output from 2011 
to 2017. 
To conclude, the low rates of manufacturing capacity utilization suggest ample 
slack remains at the nation’s factories even as other measures of resource utilization, 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
23 of 185
such as the output gap and the unemployment rate relative to its natural rate, have 
moved past their sustainable levels. The published utilization rates perhaps mask a 
higher “short run” operating rate, but the principal reason for low utilization is the 
anemic manufacturing recovery, which reflects the subpar pace of the overall 
recovery layered with the composition and sourcing of domestic demand. 
Granting all that, the lower operating rates also could partly reflect a longer-run 
declining trend in operating rates that is independent of those factors.  First, 
responding to trends in the cost of capital, plant managers could be choosing to hold a 
larger buffer of excess capacity to satisfy unpredictable demand rather than the classic 
practice of smoothing production by building inventories.  This would lead to lower 
optimal industry utilization rates.  Finally, the literature on declining business 
dynamism that documents the slowing of start-up activity suggests a flipside:  Just as 
new businesses have been slower to form the past several years, less-productive 
plants have been slower to shutter—which, for this story, would prop up capacity and 
thus lower utilization rates. Steve will now continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN. Thank you, Norm.  I’ll be starting off on the next page of your 
handout.  In perhaps a first for the FOMC, I’d like to open my remarks with a quote 
often attributed to Chairman Mao Zedong:  “There is great chaos under heaven.  The 
situation is excellent.” [Laughter] As far as the global economy is concerned, I’m 
not sure I would go so far as to say the situation is excellent, but considering the 
many risks swirling around, it could be a lot worse. 
As can be seen in your first slide, after growing nearly 3 percent in 2017, a little 
above potential, real GDP in the foreign economies is expected to maintain that pace 
this year and edge down just a bit over the remainder of the forecast period.  A lot of 
attention has been paid to the weakness of incoming data in the advanced foreign 
economies, which pushed first-quarter AFE growth—the red line—below our April 
estimate.  But much of this weakness likely owed to transitory factors like bad 
weather and labor strikes.  Moreover, EME growth—the blue line—surprised on the 
upside.  So we don’t think we’re seeing a significant slowing of the global economy, 
and we’ve revised our outlook down just a touch since the April Tealbook.  By the 
same token, several prominent downside risks have become more apparent since your 
previous meeting, but unless they intensify further, they are unlikely to have more 
than a small effect on foreign real GDP growth. 
Starting with trade policies, your next slide, the U.S. Administration has rescinded 
its temporary exemptions from the steel and aluminum tariffs, set a June 15 deadline 
to finalize tariffs on almost $50 billion in Chinese goods, announced an investigation 
to consider protections against auto imports on grounds of national security, and 
bogged down on negotiations over NAFTA.  Several of our trading partners have 
signaled retaliatory actions.  We are not in a full-blown trade war, but its probability 
is rising.  Additionally, policy uncertainty could start to weigh on global trade and 
investment, although we haven’t seen much evidence of that yet in the data. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
24 of 185
A second risk factor relates to increased financial stresses in emerging markets, as 
shown in slide 15.  Panel 1 shows that countries with more pronounced vulnerabilities 
have experienced larger depreciations of their currencies.  Turkey and Argentina have 
been hit hardest, reflecting their large fiscal and external deficits, reliance on foreign 
financing, and concerns about central bank independence.  But other countries have 
also experienced stresses, raising the question of whether some common shock, such 
as rising U.S. interest rates, might be responsible.  The evidence on the role of U.S. 
rates is murky, as shown in panel 2; U.S. interest rates have been rising for many 
quarters, but the dollar has only recently appreciated against EME currencies.  In any 
event, as the credit spreads in panel 3 show, financial pressures on EMEs remain 
muted compared with previous stress episodes, and so, at this point, EME turbulence 
remains a downside risk rather than a factor dragging down our baseline outlook by 
much. 
In the past, financial conditions in the AFEs and EMEs have taken turns being 
stressed, which has also helped to relieve stress among our staff.  This time, as I turn 
to your next slide, the spike in EME volatility combined with a resurgence of euro-
area woes. As Simon has described, markets have calmed some since Italy formed a 
government and the immediate risk of new elections was averted.  Nevertheless, the 
new government’s inclination toward fiscal laxity and its ambivalence toward the 
European Union are likely to keep markets on edge, weighing on asset prices and on 
the flow of credit and spending.  On the assumption that political and market 
pressures will restrain the government from undertaking especially damaging 
policies, we’ve revised down the outlook for Italian and euro-area real GDP growth 
only moderately.  But the political situation is fragile, and, as we explored in a 
Tealbook alternative scenario, much more adverse outcomes are possible. 
The risks associated with trade, emerging market volatility, and Italy reinforce our 
conviction that monetary policy normalization will proceed only very slowly in the 
advanced economies, as illustrated in your next slide.  Policy rates should take years 
to hit their new normal levels and, in some cases, will likely end up well below their 
pre-GFC levels. 
This brings us to the final risk I’d like to discuss today.  Observers have raised 
concerns that a further prolonged period of sustained low interest rates—a so-called 
low-for-long scenario—would add to pressures on profitability in the financial 
system, incentivize greater risk-taking, and thus threaten financial stability.  To 
explore these concerns, the BIS Committee on the Global Financial System, or 
CGFS, under the leadership of Vice Chair Dudley, initiated a study group composed 
of representatives of 19 central banks, led by Ulrich Bindseil of the ECB as well as 
myself.  As an aside, let me mention that Bill has done a great job of chairing the 
CGFS, and all of the members of the committee will certainly miss him. 
The “low rates” study group focused on the profitability and behavior of banks, 
insurance companies, and pension funds.  As shown on your next slide, it considered 
three distinct interest rate scenarios, constructed for 22 countries, illustrated here 
using the example of the United Kingdom.  Focusing on panel 1, the baseline 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
25 of 185
scenario, the red line, is largely based on IMF projections for all the countries in the 
study and entails a gradual rise in interest rates to more normal levels.  In the low-for­
long scenario, the blue line, continued weakness in economic growth and inflation 
keep nominal interest rates very low.  Finally, in the snapback scenario, the yellow 
line, rates remain very low initially but later rise sharply in response to a pickup in 
inflation from low levels.  This scenario is intended to address the possibility that 
risk-taking adjustments by financial institutions to low rates might make them more 
vulnerable should interest rates subsequently rise. 
I’d like to briefly summarize our main findings, focusing on banks in the 
advanced economies.  As indicated in your next slide, we estimated panel data 
regressions to explain net interest margins, or NIMs, as well as the overall 
profitability of banks as measured by return on assets, or ROAs, on the basis of the 
short-term interest rate, the slope of the yield curve, and macroeconomic conditions 
such as GDP growth and inflation.  Regarding the coefficient estimates shown below, 
both the level of short-term interest rates (panel 1) and the slope of the yield curve 
(panel 2) positively and significantly affect bank NIMs.  We are still investigating 
why the effect is larger in the United States than in the advanced foreign economies.  
However, the effect of these interest rate variables on banks’ overall profitability, or 
ROAs, is quite small, suggesting that banks have found ways to offset the effect of 
lower interest rates on NIMs, such as by cutting costs and switching to fee-based 
activities. 
Using these estimates, we constructed projections of bank NIMs and ROAs for 
the baseline and low-for-long scenarios, as shown on your next slide.  While NIMs 
would fall materially in a low-for-long scenario, ROAs would not.  It looks like 
prolonged low interest rates would have only minimal effects on overall bank 
profitability and thus resilience to adverse shocks, at least on average in the advanced 
economies. The regression approach described here is less useful to analyze the 
snapback scenario, something I will return to shortly. 
Our findings regarding the potential of low interest rates to encourage risk-taking 
behavior at banks, the topic of your next slide, were also moderately reassuring.  
Looking at the low interest rate period following the GFC, there was some evidence 
that banks had shifted their assets toward longer maturities (panel 1) and greater 
concentration in real estate loans in some economies (not shown).  But the aggregate 
data show little evidence of more exuberant risk-taking; for example, credit-to­
deposit ratios (panel 2) have declined since the GFC for both U.S. and AFE banks.  
And, focusing on two major economies in which interest rates have been especially 
low (panel 3), bank-credit-to-GDP ratios are still declining in the euro area and 
remain well below 1990s levels in Japan.  Finally, extensive panel data analysis 
revealed little correlation between interest rates and measures of bank soundness and 
risk-taking. 
Despite these benign findings, however, we judged that a low-for-long scenario 
could still engender material risks to financial stability.  First, as shown on your next 
slide, we found that interest rates may exert particularly strong effects on bank profits 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
26 of 185
in countries whose interest rates are already very low, in which  banking markets are 
more competitive, and in which banks are more dependent on deposits for funding.  
Thus, especially in light of their already low profitability, many small retail banks in 
Europe and Japan might indeed be at risk in a low-for-long scenario. 
Second, turning the page, the relatively subdued risk-taking we identified might 
reflect de-risking and the tightening of regulations in the wake of the GFC.  Such 
restraint might erode if interest rates remain low and continue to depress returns and 
profitability.  This might be especially likely in situations in which economic growth 
picks up, but low inflation restrains policy tightening. 
Third, as per your next slide, a future snapback in interest rates could lead to 
valuation and credit losses, and such effects could be exacerbated if banks responded 
to a previous period of low rates by extending durations and shifting loans to the 
interest-sensitive real estate sector. The panel shows a simulation analysis featured in 
the study, using the Swiss National Bank’s microdata-based model of Swiss retail 
banks.  Net earnings fall even more in the snapback scenario, the orange line, than in 
the low-for-long scenario, the blue line.  And, if a 30 percent fall in real estate prices 
is assumed (the purple line), earnings fall even more. 
These simulation results broadly mirror those obtained under scenarios considered 
in U.S. stress tests in recent years.  They underscore the importance of ensuring that 
financial institutions are resilient to sharp changes in interest rates, a key policy 
message of our study’s report.  That concludes our presentation, and Norm and I 
would be happy to answer your questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks very much.  Questions for Norm or Steve or both?  
President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Norm, thank you for the presentation on 
manufacturing utilization.  I was one of the people who asked about it previously, so I 
appreciate it. 
I’m curious how much discretion there is when businesses fill out those surveys, and let 
me give you an example.  I was recently in northern Minnesota, and I visited an aircraft 
manufacturer, Cirrus, that makes small airplanes.  And, of course, the management team kept 
telling me they just can’t find workers—they’re at capacity.  So I started asking more questions, 
and I said, “What kind of shifts are you running?”  And they run one shift four days a week.  
And I said, “Well, why don’t you work on Fridays?”  And they said, “Well, our employees like 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
27 of 185
to go fishing on Fridays.”  And I said, “Well, what are your competitors doing?” They said, 
“Our competitors run three shifts 24/7.” 
I’m curious.  From Cirrus’s perspective, they’re probably at capacity.  I heard that 
discussion, and I heard, well, if there’s a lot more demand, they can pay their employees 
overtime and they can work an extra day.  I’m just curious, how would that be viewed in these 
surveys?  Is Cirrus at capacity, or is it completely up to them to determine if they’re at capacity 
or not? 
MR. MORIN.  The plant managers are instructed to assume the capital in place and 
sufficient labor, but the normal shift pattern.  So if traditionally they run just one shift, then they 
would fill out the forms assuming just one shift.  But if they’re not as staffed up as they would 
like to be, they might be operating, according to the survey of plant capacity, at less than 
100 percent, because if labor and materials were fully available, they would be able to produce a 
bit more.  But they would be answering as a one-shift plant. 
MR. KASHKARI.  I’m sorry, let me make sure I understand.  If they really did have a 
worker shortage, as some assert, that would then lead the surveys to conclude that they were 
below capacity, that there was spare capacity? 
MR. MORIN.  Right. 
MR. KASHKARI.  So that would be a consistency between the labor market view of the 
output gap—meaning, we are running above potential—and still showing unused capacity in the 
manufacturing surveys.  I thought those two were sending different signals.  That would imply 
that they could be consistent.  Maybe I’m misunderstanding. 
MR. MORIN.  Well, again, if the specific plant, given its capital and equipment in place 
and running their normal number of shifts, did not have as much labor as they would normally 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
28 of 185
use to operate the machinery fully, then they would be running at a utilization rate that is lower 
than 100 percent, according to that survey. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Okay.  Thank you.  
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  The low-for-long discussion was quite interesting.  We’re actually 
having a conference on it this fall, although we’re less focused on banks, more focused on 
nonbanks.  But I think it is an interesting issue.  You didn’t mention how portfolio allocation 
changed.  If I were a bank in Europe, and I was thinking about emerging market Europe, for 
example, and increasing my exposure there, or taking other kinds of risks—did you look at 
portfolio risks as well as expanding the duration?  Because there are many ways that you can 
reach for yield.  And I would think the easiest, if I were a European bank, would be looking at 
Eastern European or emerging markets in a way that I hadn’t before.  You may not have looked 
at it, but is there any evidence of shifts in portfolio allocation to a riskier portfolio? 
MR. KAMIN.  We did look at such data as were available on that topic. We were a little 
bit hamstrung by the lack of uniform data across advanced economies.  But in the case of 
Europe, for example, we looked at measures they had of the quality of loans, and those did not 
appear to have deteriorated. 
We also looked at credit standards that come from the ECB survey of European bank 
lending.  And those actually indicated only a very moderate loosening of credit standards in the 
years since the euro crisis, which was a much smaller loosening of credit standards than the 
tightening of credit standards that had taken place during the preceding period of crisis. 
And then, finally, apropos of the issue of switching their lending to more higher-return 
sources, such as emerging markets, European banks have done the opposite in response to 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
29 of 185
de-risking and in response to tighter regulation.  They have actually pulled back tremendously 
from their emerging market investments, leaving that field open for other banks. 
Undeniably, there have been some pockets of greater risk-taking.  For example, the Swiss 
have been very focused on concerns in their markets in which Swiss banks are very highly 
exposed to what, at least by their standards, is a housing bubble.  But we didn’t find that to be 
more generally the case. My colleague, John Ammer, worked a lot on that.  Did I miss anything 
there? 
MR. AMMER. There is some evidence that Japanese banks expanded internationally, 
but mainly to other advanced economies, not to emerging markets. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question is on page 19 of the 
presentation here, “Estimated Effects of Rates on Bank Profitability.”  According to panel 2 
which shows the yield-curve slope, how am I supposed to read the 0.30 here?  And then I go to 
the ROA yield-curve slope, it’s minus 0.05 or something.  I guess the first question is what is the 
scale? 
MR. KAMIN.  I think the way I would read that—and I’ll invite John to correct me if I’m 
wrong—is that an increase in the slope of the yield curve by 1 percentage point would lead to an 
increase in NIMs of 0.3 percentage point.  The NIMs are varying from 1 to 4, so that gives you a 
sense of the magnitude.  Is that right, John? 
MR. AMMER.  It’s 32 basis points. 
MR. KAMIN.  Okay. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  But the point is that the ROA would be smaller; the sensitivity 
would be smaller. 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
30 of 185
MR. KAMIN.  Right. Let’s put it this way.  We are looking at the ROA numbers in cases 
in which they are showing negatives as being probably more in the neighborhood of a statistical 
aberration, rather than something that we think you should focus on. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  But you might say “zero.” 
MR. KAMIN. Yes, exactly.  So the message that we take from these regressions is that 
interest rates definitely affect NIMs in a positive direction, but ROAs less so.  It could be that 
there actually is a genuine reason why there’s a negative effect on ROAs, but that’s not where 
we’ve been focusing. 
MR. BULLARD. Okay.  I guess what I was thinking when you were describing this is, 
when I watch market commentary and interest rates move around, bank stocks seem to be 
extremely sensitive to this.  But this would suggest that they shouldn’t be. How should I think 
about that? 
MR. KAMIN.  Well, a couple of things.  First of all, this is looking at the effect of 
interest rates and yield curve slopes on bank profits holding constant real GDP growth and 
inflation and other things.  Sometimes you have changes in interest rates that are a direct result of 
monetary policy shocks.  And in those cases, the monetary policy shocks could be affecting a lot 
of variables in the environment that banks face. 
So you have to look at that experiment.  And I think event studies tend to show that when 
you have surprises in interest rates, bank stock prices do go down.  That could be because the 
increase in interest rates is affecting the environment; it could also just be affecting the present 
discounted value of future profits for banks. 
MR. BULLARD. Yes.  So the Italian turmoil during the intermeeting period—the 
longer-term rates in the U.S. rates, and I guess global rates, fell dramatically, bank stocks were 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
31 of 185
totally creamed.  And I think it was because people said they aren’t going to be able to make any 
money at these lower rates. 
MR. KAMIN.  You mean in the most recent— 
MR. BULLARD.  Just now.  Just in the past couple of— 
MR. KAMIN.  I would say what we saw most obviously is bank stocks in Europe being 
really creamed just because of the likelihood of something terrible in Italy happening, and a lot 
of these European banks have a lot of exposure to Italy. 
MR. BULLARD. Okay. 
MR. KAMIN.  Why U.S. bank prices have fallen I’m a little less sure about. 
MR. POTTER.  A lot of prices of bank stocks are up 2 percent since the previous 
meeting.  Europe is down 12 percent.  I think those are some of the reasons. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  More credit losses than interest rates. 
MR. BULLARD. Yes, okay.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you for the questions.  No further questions, so we’ll 
turn it over now to Dan for the SEP briefing.  And let me say that, with the changes in the SEP, 
with the change in the median for 2018 from three rate increases to four, and with the increasing 
number who are calling for a modest overshoot, I think this potentially could be a subject for the 
press conference tomorrow.  So I would particularly welcome questions and insights that 
participants may have after the staff briefing.  Over to you, Dan. 
MS. LI.3  Okay.  Thank you.  I will be referring to the packet labeled “Material 
for Briefing on Summary of Economic Projections.”  To summarize, changes in your 
projections relative to March are modest.  Your current projections show slightly 
lower unemployment from 2018 through 2020 and marginally higher GDP growth in 
2018. Most of you noted that your revisions reflect, in large part, strength in 
incoming data.  A large majority of you project that the unemployment rate will be at 
or below 3.5 percent by late next year.  A large majority of you also made slight 
3 The materials used by Ms. Li are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
32 of 185
upward adjustments to your headline inflation projections for 2018, and many of you 
also slightly increased your near-term core inflation projections.  All of you now see 
headline and core inflation at, or modestly above, 2 percent in 2019 and 2020.  Most 
participants continue to view three or four rate hikes this year as appropriate, with the 
median of your projections for the federal funds rate at the end of 2018 edging up 
0.25 point.  The median of your projections for 2019 is also up 0.25 point and implies 
three hikes next year.  Among those who provided a value for the longer-run federal 
funds rate, all but two see the funds rate above that value by the end of 2020.  And 
although your assessments of the uncertainty and balance of risks surrounding your 
projections are little changed overall, many of you pointed to slightly higher 
uncertainty or downside risks due to trade policy, and a few of you mentioned the 
political situation in Italy as a downside risk. 
Exhibit 1 summarizes your economic projections, which are conditional on your 
individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.  As the top panel shows, the 
medians of your projections of real GDP growth this year and the next are 2.8 percent 
and 2.4 percent, respectively. The median drops to 2.0 percent in 2020, a touch above 
the median projections of longer-run growth.  Most of you continue to cite fiscal 
policy as a driver of strong economic activity over the next couple of years. Many of 
you also mentioned accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, 
strength in the global outlook, continued momentum in the labor market, or positive 
readings on business and consumer sentiment.  As the second panel shows, the 
median of your unemployment rate projections declines to 3.6 percent at the end of 
this year and runs at 3.5 percent over the next two years.  All of you see the 
unemployment rate in late 2020 running well below your longer-run estimates by 
anywhere between 0.5 and 1.2 percentage points. 
The third and fourth panels summarize your projections of headline and core PCE 
price inflation.  For each measure, the median of your projections moves up to or lies 
slightly above 2 percent by the end of 2018 and remains roughly flat through 2020.  
None of you forecast inflation above 2.3 percent. 
Turning to the top panel of exhibit 2:  Most of you marked up your projections of 
real GDP growth in 2018.  The medians of your unemployment rate forecasts , shown 
in the second panel, are down 0.2 percentage point this year and 0.1 in 2019 and 
2020. Some of you also lowered your estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate, 
but the median is unchanged.  As a result of the revisions to the staff forecast and to 
your projections, the Tealbook forecasts of real GDP growth and unemployment are 
now close to the medians of your forecasts. 
As the lower panels show, the medians of your forecasts of headline PCE inflation 
for this year and the next are up slightly from their March levels.  The median of your 
forecasts of core PCE inflation is up a touch for this year and unchanged for 
subsequent years.  Some of you pointed to incoming data on energy prices to explain 
the upward revisions.  The staff, like you, expects headline and core PCE inflation to 
stay close to 2 percent. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
33 of 185
Exhibit 3 reports your assessments of the appropriate path of the federal funds 
rate.  The median of your latest projections stands at 2.4 percent at the end of this 
year, 3.1 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2020.  Twelve of 
you see the federal funds rate rising above its longer-run level by the end of 2020.  
With several of you revising up your federal funds rate projections for 2018, 2019, or 
both, and only one of you revising down, the medians for 2018 and 2019 are both 
25 basis points higher than in March, while the central tendencies in both years were 
roughly unchanged.  Eight of you now anticipate a total of four or more hikes this 
year, one more participant than in March.  A few of you pointed to strong labor 
market data as a reason to raise the near-term policy rate path.  The medians of your 
estimates for both 2020 and the longer-run federal funds rate are unchanged relative 
to March. 
The red diamonds in exhibit 3 show the medians of federal funds rate 
prescriptions derived by plugging your SEP projections of core PCE inflation and the 
unemployment rate, along with your assessments of the longer-run normal federal 
funds rate and unemployment rate, into the non-inertial Taylor (1999) rule.  In light of 
the prominent role of the inertial version of this rule in policy discussions and the 
staff analysis, we are also showing the medians of the prescriptions of this rule—the 
green squares.  In general, your individual assessments of the appropriate federal 
funds rate lie well below the prescriptions of either rule.  The gaps between your 
projections and the prescriptions of the non-inertial rule are wider than those between 
your projections and the prescriptions using the inertial rule.  Relative to March, the 
medians of the inertial Taylor rule prescriptions are down roughly 5 basis points this 
year and up 5 basis points in 2019 and 2020, while those for the non-inertial rule are 
up 10 to 30 basis points. 
The top panels of exhibits 4.A through 4.C show the paths of the medians of your 
projections (the red lines) surrounded by confidence intervals derived from historical 
projection errors of various private and government projections.  The lower-left 
panels of these exhibits show the distributions of your assessments of the uncertainty 
attached to your projections, whereas the lower-right panels summarize your 
assessments of the balance of risks. 
Nearly all of you continue to view the uncertainty associated with your 
projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.  Several of you 
mentioned trade policy and the global outlook as contributing to somewhat higher 
uncertainty than was the case in March.  Compared with March, even more of you see 
the risks to your projections as broadly balanced.  Specifically, for real GDP growth, 
only one participant views the risks as tilted to the downside, and the number of 
participants who view risks as tilted to the upside dropped from four to two.  For the 
unemployment rate, the number of participants who see the risks as titled toward low 
readings dropped from four to two.  In the case of inflation, all but one of you judge 
the risks to either headline or core PCE inflation as broadly balanced. 
Although several of you continue to point to fiscal developments as a source of 
upside risk, many of you cited developments related to trade policy as posing 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
34 of 185
downside risks to your growth forecasts, and a few of you pointed to the political 
situation in Italy or the global outlook more generally as downside risk factors.  A 
few of you noted that the appreciation of the dollar posed downside risks to the 
inflation outlook. 
Your final exhibit shows a fan chart associated with the medians of your 
projections for the federal funds rate.  The chart assigns a 70 percent probability to 
the federal funds rate being in a range of 1.7 to 3.1 percent at the end of 2018 and in a 
range of 1.2 to 5.6 percent at the end of 2020.  Thank you.  That concludes my 
prepared remarks, and I’ll be happy to take questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Questions for Dan?  Or comments? Tom. 
MR. BARKIN.  Well, it’s not a question, but you were asking for comments— 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  As well. 
MR. BARKIN. —earlier.  I’m sure they’ll spend a lot of time on the four versus three, 
but what I took away from it, actually, is it seems to me there’s a reasonable amount of 
narrowing in our individual forecasts  regarding where we see the world going, and, 
directionally, we’re all pretty much saying it similarly in terms of unemployment below the 
natural rate, inflation moving at target.  I don’t know whether it’s doable or not, but moving the 
conversation toward the conviction level and, I think, away from the 15 individual forecasts—I 
ended up with eight–seven versus seven–eight, which feels to me a productive conversation. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Interesting, yes. Further comments or questions? President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Yes, I guess I have a comment on the inflation overshoot issue.  I think 
2.1 is not materially different from 2.0, and that you can just say that it’s nice to be talking about 
higher numbers, but we shouldn’t get carried away about how accurately we can really measure 
inflation. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
35 of 185
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  We’re going to take our coffee break now, and 
we’ll be back here, please, at a quarter of three to start the economic go-round.  Thanks very 
much. 
[Coffee break] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Let’s begin the go-round on the economy, starting with 
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I would also like to start with adding 
my voice of thanks and appreciation to Bill Dudley for his service to the Federal Reserve, the 
110 FOMC meetings, apparently, according to my math, on the basis of the numbers you gave, 
Mr. Chair, and also just my greater appreciation as the day comes closer where I will be trying to 
fill your big shoes. 
Like Chairman Powell, I have always been in wonder of your calm demeanor, your sense 
of humor despite the great deal of stress in the economy and everything that has happened during 
your 11 years. But what I really think most of is the thought leadership—not just focused on 
what’s happening in the markets or the economy today, but really thinking about strategy for the 
long term; thinking about how we should look at issues. Like Simon, I too go back to when you 
first joined us here at the table, as Desk manager, and how you immediately shifted the role of 
the Desk, to not just reporting financial conditions and talking about what’s happening, but really 
helping the Committee think about what it means and how it fits in with what’s happening in the 
economy and monetary policy. 
Obviously, you’ll be greatly missed here and at the New York Fed.  I do think there is 
some good news, especially for you, on this.  I am hopeful that you will not have as many 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
36 of 185
headaches about hearing about the Taylor rule [laughter] and I’m a little afraid r*, too [laughter]. 
But, really, the best. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’ll have something to say about r* tomorrow.  
[Laughter] 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you. 
The economic outlook is decidedly sunny.  The latest data signal a robust economic 
expansion.  It’s still gaining strength.  In particular, I would like to point to one very recent data 
point that I find very encouraging regarding the outlook for growth.  I am, of course, referring to 
the decisive victory by the Golden State Warriors in the NBA Finals. [Laughter] 
Why, you may ask—I’m sure President Evans will—does this give me greater confidence 
regarding the economic outlook? Well, a careful econometric analysis, using a calculator, shows 
that in the year following the Warriors’ championship, real GDP growth has averaged a 
respectable 3.3 percent. On the basis of this historical pattern and other indicators pointing to 
solid growth—like fiscal stimulus, an improving global economy, and favorable financial 
conditions—I expect real GDP to increase 2.8 percent this year, well above the pace of potential, 
which I still put at 1.7 percent. 
Now, as a side note for those such as President Evans, who at times has questioned the 
methodology and conclusions of my 12th District sports-based economic analysis, rest assured 
that the leading experts tell me that I am highly unlikely to be in a position of touting my 
District’s basketball team’s championships in the future.  [Laughter] I view the risks to this 
outlook as balanced as the increasing downside risk associated with a deterioration of 
international trade relationships is counterbalanced by risks and tailwinds driving stronger than 
expected growth.  This year’s strong economic growth comes at a time when the labor market is 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
37 of 185
already booming.  Last month the unemployment rate dipped to 3.75 percent, and I see it coming 
down to 3.5 percent within a year.  That is obviously an historic low, not seen since the 1960s. 
Other indicators, including an all-time high in the job openings rate, elevated quits rates, 
very long average time to fill vacancies, and continued firming of wage increases confirm the 
labor markets are quite tight. And, consistent with these indicators, my contacts increasingly 
report difficulties finding qualified workers.  They’re coping with shortages by raising wages, 
offering signing bonuses, and even bringing on less-qualified workers and providing on-the-job 
training. They tell me they expect these moves to raise costs and to hold down near-term 
productivity growth. 
With the unemployment rate heading for historically low levels, it’s an appropriate time 
to reassess the estimate of the natural rate of unemployment.  So my trusty staff recently 
revisited this issue using three different methods:  a shift-share analysis, a linear regression 
model, and a flow rates approach.  And using each of these methods we triy to measure, and 
account for, the effect that changes in the composition of the labor force have had on the long-
run unemployment rate. 
Now, although the methods differ, the results are strikingly similar.  Changes in the age 
and education structure of the labor force have shaved about 0.4 percentage point off the natural 
rate between 2007 and 2010.  But, equally important, since 2010, there has been relatively little 
additional downward movement in the implied natural rate of unemployment.  Moreover, on the 
basis of this analysis and conditional on projected future changes in the composition of the labor 
force, these should put little, if any, additional downward pressure on the natural rate. On the 
basis of this analysis, my estimate of the natural rate is 4.6 percent, and I expect this to prevail 
over the foreseeable future.  With the unemployment rate projected to reach 3.5 percent by next 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
38 of 185
year and stay there for quite some time, this does imply a very strong and, indeed, tight labor 
market throughout the forecast period. 
Turning to inflation, we’re closing in on our 2 percent goal, and with the sustained very 
tight labor market, I expect nominal wage growth and price inflation to pick up somewhat 
further, producing a modest overshooting of our 2 percent target by 2020.  However, there are no 
signs pointing to a more rapid takeoff in inflation.  Therefore, I view the risks to this inflation 
outlook as balanced. 
With regard to appropriate monetary policy, my SEP projection is four funds rate 
increases this year and further increases in 2019.  This is the same path I penciled in back in 
March and results by 2020 in a nearly 1 percentage point overshoot of the long-run nominal 
funds rate, which I still view to be 2.5 percent, as my estimate of the neutral real rate remains at 
0.5 percent.  In my projection, this interest rate path does not produce an inversion of the yield 
curve, and that is reassuring, because much evidence does suggest an inverted yield curve is a 
pretty reliable predictor of recessions. 
Now, my staff has continued to analyze this issue and confirms that this predictive power 
is fairly robust to including other factors such as the term premium or corporate bond risk 
premiums, and that it shows up in some other countries as well. And this analysis makes me 
uneasy with the “this time is different” arguments that dismiss out of hand the relevance of the 
yield curve evidence for the current situation.  I do think that long-term yields provide useful 
information about market participants’ views of future interest rates and economic conditions.  
So we should pay close attention to what they and other indicators of financial conditions may be 
telling us. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
39 of 185
But, of course, the yield curve is not inverted at the moment, and instead, as illustrated in 
the alternative view box in Tealbook, the issue only comes to a head in a few years from now 
under the Tealbook projection.  Specifically, the Tealbook has very high short-term rates relative 
to long-term rates, and that leads to a long period of an inverted yield curve, and that produces 
the high probability of a recession, using yield curve models.  That said, I simply don’t find the 
Tealbook baseline—with its very strong growth accompanied by a sharp tightening in the stance 
of policy—compelling.  Instead, the gradual path of normalization envisioned in my projection 
and the median SEP appears more consistent with the medium-term outlook of relatively slow 
trend growth, a low neutral rate of interest, and muted inflationary pressures.  I’m SEP 
respondent number six.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL. Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My own outlook is probably 
characterized best by the title of the alternative view box in the current Tealbook: “A Strong but 
Precarious Projection.” The data received over the past six weeks have been quite positive. 
Labor markets have tightened, and the unemployment rate is already where the March SEP 
median expected it to fall by the end of this year.  In addition, momentum this quarter appears to 
be quite strong, and my forecast has real GDP growing much faster than potential through the 
rest of the year. 
With the unemployment rate already at 3.8 percent and taking into account the fact that 
my forecasts were above potential real GDP growth, the unemployment rate will quite likely fall 
further.  To be specific, my baseline forecast is that the unemployment rate will level off at 
3.4 percent, further tightening labor markets from a starting point of already tight conditions.  In 
my forecast, tight labor markets generate increasing wage pressures, which only partially show 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
40 of 185
through to inflation.  Ultimately, the inflation rate rises gradually to a level somewhat above the 
Tealbook forecast.  Like the Tealbook, my forecast is predicated on a higher federal funds rate 
than the path in the median SEP. 
The last time the unemployment rate fell significantly below 4 percent for an extended 
period of time was in the late 1960s under Chairman Martin.  At that time, the Committee was 
concerned about the deficit financing of fiscal expansion generated by the Vietnam War.  By the 
end of the ’60s, the Committee assumed that inflation would not pick up, in part because it 
expected the unemployment rate to rise.  By the beginning of 1970, the unemployment rate 
finally began to rise back to the full-employment rate, yet the Committee’s assumption about 
inflation proved wrong, as we experienced a steady pickup in both inflation and inflation 
expectations.  Most historians of the Federal Reserve view this as a period of policy mistake. 
Of course, this time may be different.  Although the Congress has put in place an 
unfunded fiscal expansion at a time of very tight labor markets, labor unions today are less 
powerful, the economy is less susceptible to oil shocks, and, as a result, wages and prices have 
risen only gradually over the past three years. 
We also enjoy well-anchored expectations today.  However, I am suspicious that this is 
more a fortuitous outcome of a benign inflation environment rather than a deep foundation upon 
which we should rest our models of wage and price determination.  Will employees continue to 
work for relatively stable wage increases in an environment where job openings are so plentiful 
and when workers know that employers are desperate for qualified talent?  As fewer people lose 
their jobs and more consider jumping ship for higher wages elsewhere, I expect a continued 
gradual pickup in wages that eventually will result in higher prices.  This prediction is buttressed 
by my forecast of an unemployment rate that lingers below 4 percent well past 2020. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
41 of 185
Although my baseline forecast is quite positive, that does not mean I do not have 
important reservations.  One such concern is closely related to the supply constraint scenario in 
the Tealbook.  While that scenario implies a very low probability of a near-term recession, it is at 
the cost of a much higher probability of a recession in the medium term. As fiscal stimulus 
wanes, and perhaps turns contractionary as the growth in debt-to-GDP ratio becomes more of a 
concern, and monetary policy becomes more restrictive in response to rising wage and price 
pressures, the economy could slow down much more than intended or desirable.  More generally, 
I do share the concerns raised in the Tealbook’s alternative view box that, taking into account 
where we are now with the unemployment rate, the process of trying to engineer a soft landing 
will run the substantial risk of falling into a full-blown recession. 
My second concern is more immediate in nature and is about financial fragility. In the 
past two weeks, there have been public announcements that Deutsche Bank is on the FDIC’s list 
of problem banks, that S&P has cut their credit rating, and that they have had significant layoffs, 
particularly at their prime broker.  Markets have certainly heard and understood these signals.  
The stock price that was trading at around $20 earlier this year is now trading around $11, with 
this decline occurring at a time when many other banks have performed much better. 
It is clear why counterparties and investors are becoming concerned.  In response to these 
pressures, which extend back a few years, Deutsche Bank raised significant capital in 2016.  
Despite that, the credit default swap rates for Deutsche look more like those for an Italian bank 
than one of Europe’s preeminent and largest systematically important banks.  Hence, the second 
risk scenario I have in mind reflects a confluence of negative factors, including political and 
economic problems in Italy, a further loss of confidence in Deutsche Bank, and Europe trade 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
June 12–13, 2018
42 of 185
issues, all occurring at a time when Europe is poorly positioned to address such problems 
economically or politically. 
The probability that unemployment in the United States rises by 1 percentage point is 
1 percent in the current Tealbook and 2 percent in the FRB/US model.  I would place that tail 
risk noticeably higher, although still well below the probability I attach to my baseline forecast.  
This is an example of how supervisory and financial stability problems could have serious 
macroeconomic consequences.  While I still view it as a relatively low probability event, we 
should have more discussions at future meetings about how such financial concerns should be 
integrated into our discussion of risks to the forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me begin by adding my thanks to Vice 
Chairman Dudley for his incredible service to the Fed, but also for his quiet leadership among 
his fellow presidents.  You know, when I was a new president, everybody said, “You don’t 
understand the Fed unless you understand New York.”  And I’m still not sure I understand New 
York, but [laughter]—so I asked if I could come up and spend some time.  You rolled out the red 
carpet.  You and your staff did a tremendous job of allowing me to “drink from a fire hose” to try 
to understand what the Desk did and what other parts of the Bank did.  It was that kind of quiet 
leadership, never missing a beat, just saying, “I’m going to do this, it’s important to the System,” 
that I appreciate on behalf of myself and my fellow presidents. 
So with that, over the intermeeting period, growth in the Third District has improved. 
Labor markets appear healthy, and consumer spending has firmed.  The pace of manufacturing 
activity has accelerated, and we continue to hear reports of wage and price pressures. The only 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
43 of 185
sector that is not sharing in the overall economic expansion is residential real estate, although 
homes continue to appreciate in value. 
With respect to employment, employment growth picked up in April, and the 
unemployment rate continued to decline.  Unemployment now stands, in the Third District, at 
4.6 percent.  Gains in employment were broad based, both across sectors and geographically 
within the District.  Sectors showing particular strength were manufacturing and construction, 
eds and meds, and professional and business services.  Thus, the region’s labor market is 
mirroring that of the nation.  Additionally, we are seeing some evidence of increased pressure on 
wages.  One staffing firm reported that jobs that previously paid $12 to $14 per hour are now 
paying $14 to $16 per hour, and that jobs are being filled at a relatively quick pace. 
Manufacturing in the region is performing quite strongly, with the indexes on new orders 
and employment in our manufacturing survey at 30-year highs.  The general activity index is 
well above its nonrecessionary average as is the future general activity index.  One diversified 
manufacturer informed me that his order backlog for electronic components has increased from 
4 to 60 weeks in a relatively short period of time.  Firms appear to be relatively optimistic and 
have robust plans for adding more jobs. 
Future capital spending plans have been substantially scaled back, however, with many of 
the region’s manufacturers citing uncertainty over trade policy as the primary reason. Some 
firms have indicated that they brought forward orders of both finished goods and raw materials 
in anticipation of caps. As well, firms are reporting that they are successfully passing through 
increased prices for raw materials.  But despite the price increases, demand continues to remain 
strong. These anecdotes are reflected more broadly in increases in both the prices paid and prices 
received indexes in our survey. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
44 of 185
Retail activity has picked up as well.  Our nonmanufacturing index continues to reflect 
moderate growth, and traffic at some of our area malls appears to be up.  Although surviving 
brick-and-mortar stores are experiencing renewed activity, we are seeing more store closures by, 
for example, Sears and K-Mart in the region.  As well, consumer confidence in the region 
remains elevated. 
The only sector that has not joined this party is residential real estate.  Permits for single-
family homes remain flat, a phenomenon that has characterized residential construction in the 
District for the past three years and is broadly similar to what has occurred in the Northeast and 
Midwest.  House prices are appreciating but at a pace that lags the nation. 
Supportive of the Board staff’s view that residential real estate will be weak in the near 
term, a builder confirms that construction workers are difficult to find, housing lots are scarce, 
and the costs of approvals on smaller parcels are prohibitively expensive.  So in our District, and 
probably the nation, supply constraints will likely be a drag on residential investment. 
To sum up, economic activity in the Third District is improving.  Overall, in “Beige Book 
speak,” I would characterize growth as moderate, and I anticipate much of the same for the rest 
of this year and next.  My view on the national picture is similar to that of the Board staff.  My 
unemployment rate does not fall quite as low as the staff projection, because I anticipate lower 
employment growth at the end of the forecast horizon. 
The big disagreement concerns the forecast of monetary policy.  I consider that 
appropriate monetary policy will call for a funds rate that will only slightly exceed its long-run 
neutral rate of 3 percent in 2020.  Thus, I don’t contemplate an inversion of the yield curve.  That 
would, in my view, constitute an unduly risky stance for policy. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
45 of 185
As was the case with President Williams, work by my staff strongly supports the material 
in the alternative-view box contributed by David Miller and complements his analysis.  For 
example, we estimated a series of probit models using pseudo maximum likelihood techniques.  
We find that the spread between the 10-year rate on Treasuries and the 3-month bond equivalent 
Treasury rate has significant out-of-sample predictive content for the onset of recessions at four-
and six-quarter horizons.  Additionally, the probability of a recession for any particular term 
spread depends on the level of the funds rate.  The higher the funds rate, the more likely is 
recession for any given value of the term spread.  For example, conditional on the funds rate and 
term spread predicted in the Tealbook as of the fourth quarter of 2020, the probability of a 
recession occurring within four quarters is 39 percent in one of our preferred models and 
50 percent in another. With respect to a recession occurring within six quarters, those 
probabilities increase to 54 percent and 70 percent, respectively. 
All of these numbers exceed the unconditional probability of a recession occurring 
sometime during the next four or six quarters. Therefore, we in Philadelphia draw a similar 
conclusion to David’s that the forecasts in the Tealbook seem to be internally inconsistent.  But 
as a policymaker, I take away the added lesson that an appropriate policy rate path that strives to 
be robust—say, in the sense of Hansen and Sargent—should avoid yield curve inversions.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It seems clear on the basis of both national 
economic statistics, and extensive District contact information, that the U.S. economy is in a very 
good state as of today—what President Williams just called “sunny.”  Or was that the afterglow 
of the Golden State Warriors’ victory?  I’m not sure. 


 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
46 of 185
MR. WILLIAMS.  Both. 
MR. BULLARD. Both. [Laughter] Accordingly, I plan to direct my comments today 
mostly toward my interpretation of macroeconomic events and on the strategy of the 
Committeeas we go forward.  In short, we are in a good state today, but will we be in a good 
state over the forecast horizon? 
Economic growth certainly looks relatively robust, but it is important to note that the 
current growth spurt is expected to be temporary.  Nearly all forecasters have growth slowing in 
2019 and 2020 from this year.  It’s far from clear that we need to respond permanently to what is 
expected to be a temporary growth phenomenon.  In the past, when growth has slowed 
temporarily, the Committee has often looked through such transitory movements. 
Of course, coupled with relatively strong growth in real GDP, we also have continuing 
strong labor market performance.  This is often discussed here as if this signals meaningful 
upward pressure on inflation outcomes.  However, the feedback from labor market performance 
to inflation has been, empirically speaking, very weak for most of the past two decades or more. 
We saw an example of how flat the Phillips curve is in the recent special memo addressed 
to the Committee concerning President Barkin’s request that the staff prepare an analysis of how 
the forecast would change if monetary policy was assumed to follow current market-based 
expectations, which tend to be more “dovish,” as opposed to the baseline staff assumption, which 
has been more “hawkish” than the market.  The central finding was that unemployment would 
move several tenths lower than the baseline, but that inflation would essentially be unchanged.  
Most people would consider that a better outcome over the forecast horizon.  Some very good 
things might happen in such a scenario, including pulling African American and Hispanic 
unemployment rates lower and closer to societal norms. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
47 of 185
Some might suggest that a more “dovish” path ahead, such as the one suggested in the 
memo prepared for President Barkin, would cause the Committee to get “behind the curve.” 
And it is certainly not apparent in that particular simulation. But I think it is important to 
emphasize that the Committee has already been preemptive in getting to the good situation we 
are in today.  In the past few years, inflation has consistently been below target, but the 
Committee nevertheless began to normalize by moving the policy rate off the near-zero levels 
and beginning to reduce the size of the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable manner. 
That the Committee’s preemptive behavior has paid off can be seen in market-based 
measures of inflation expectations, which remain around 2 percent on a five-year basis and also 
on a five-year, five-year-forward basis.  These expectations are for headline CPI.  After adjusting 
somewhat, let’s say by subtracting 30 basis points to translate to PCE inflation, we get the 
suggestion that the market thinks the Committee will continue to undershoot its inflation target 
over the next decade. I realize that one could make other adjustments to these data, such as for 
inflation risk premiums as well. 
These expectations make sense to me in that, if we look at actual inflation measured by 
the Dallas Fed trimmed mean rate year over year, that’s 1.7 percent today.  So the market is 
really not saying that we’re going to see a lot of inflation pressure ahead. 
I like the market-based measures of inflation expectations because they contain all 
available information as participants place their bets on future inflation outcomes.  In particular, 
market participants are aware of the temporarily booming economy, tight labor markets, and 
recent changes in fiscal policy, all of which are priced in.  The market also prices in an 
expectation regarding future monetary policy, but that expectation is generally more “dovish” 
than the Committee’s. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
48 of 185
But despite having already priced in all of these developments, plus a more dovish 
outlook for Committee policy, the market judgment is that the Committee will miss its inflation 
target on the low side in the years ahead.  How could this be, in view of the fact that the policy 
rate, even today, seems to be at a very low level?  The answer is that it does not take much to 
create a restrictive monetary policy in today’s global interest rate environment. 
I’d encourage the Committee to keep in mind that the Bank of Japan and the ECB still 
have negative policy rates and are still buying assets.  The real safe short-term interest rate is still 
very low globally.  The neutral level of that rate, best defined as the trend component, remains 
negative today.  If we add 2 percent to that negative level, we may conclude that the neutral level 
of the nominal federal funds rate is around 175 basis points, very close to where we are today. 
Moreover, I think it is unwise to predict mean reversion in the real safe rate, as that rate is the 
culmination of 30 years or more of developments in longer-term fundamental factors. Better to 
assume no change in the real safe trend rate over the forecast horizon. 
Increasing the policy rate from here would, in my view, be moving toward a restrictive 
policy stance and coupled with balance sheet reduction, which is a tighter monetary policy.  
Because there is little indication of inflationary pressure currently, I would interpret this as the 
Committee betting on a nonlinear Phillips curve.  I see very little evidence of such nonlinear 
effects. 
Finally, we have yield curve inversion lurking for the U.S. economy.  I have several 
remarks on this issue.  First of all, the curve is not inverted today, so recession probabilities 
remain low today.  If the curve does invert later this year or in the first half of 2019, recession 
probabilities will rise, but even then recession would be sometime in the future.  Related to this 
topic, I liked the Tealbook’s box on the precarious projection. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
49 of 185
Second, we are the cause of the flattening yield curve.  We do not need to push 
normalization so hard as to invert the yield curve with inflation as low as it is today. 
Third, some say that the yield curve will not invert because the 10-year yield will 
increase, which I think is a perfectly reasonable position to take.  I think this is fine, but we need 
25 basis points a quarter at the current pace of policy normalization.  And, generally speaking, 
we have not been getting this in recent market performance.  So I would see further flattening as 
we continue to push harder on the normalization agenda. 
Fourth, some say that we may get an inversion, but that it would not be a significant 
development.  Effectively, they’d be saying, “this time is different.”  Along with President 
Williams, I am uneasy in taking this type of interpretation.  As a staff person, I was burned both 
in 2000 and 2007 when arguments were made around the Federal Reserve to ignore yield curve 
arguments.  We were wrong both times, and, in the second case, we had a very serious downturn.  
The view that this time is different ignores the strength of the empirical record in the United 
States, which is quite strong. 
A variant of this argument that this time is different is that yield curve inversion can 
occur, but it’s not causal for recessions.  I do not find this argument persuasive, either.  In my 
view, recessions are caused by shocks, and it’s simply implausible that recessionary shocks just 
happened to occur right after the yield curve inverted during the U.S. postwar era. 
Fifth, some say quantitative easing has depressed term premiums—let’s say, 80 basis 
points—so that the yield curve is steeper than it otherwise appears.  I do not think this is the right 
view for policy purposes either.  The leading theory of quantitative easing is that it is a signal.  
While assets are being purchased by the monetary authority, the policymaker is unlikely to raise 
the policy rate.  So quantitative easing was a way to promise “lower for longer.”  Once the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
50 of 185
purchasing stops and the policy rate begins to rise, there is no longer any signal coming from the 
size of the balance sheet. 
Longer-term yields, therefore, mostly reflect growth in inflation fundamentals for the 
period ahead and not lingering effects of quantitative easing.  In any event, a term premium 
effect would presumably be fading, even if it existed, over the life of a 10-year Treasury bond, as 
the balance sheet is expected to return to normal in the early part of the 10-year window.  
Therefore, pricing effects today should be relatively small and falling.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Over the past six weeks, the economy happily 
has evolved about as we expected.  GDP has been strong, with the pickup in consumption that 
we had forecast.  Labor markets have continued to tighten, and inflation has stayed firm.  I am 
still new, but I imagine we don’t always forecast this well. [Laughter] 
The Fifth District sees the same strength.  Bank loan pipelines are strong.  Commercial 
construction is booming.  We expect continued growth through the second half of the year.  
Consistent with the Tealbook, our contacts are beginning to report late-cycle productivity 
challenges and supply constraints. 
Against that background, I might note four thoughts.  First, like others around the table, I 
see the international situation as representing downside risks that are sizable but with relatively 
low likelihood.  Of course, it is unclear how the tariff situation will develop, but I did want to 
say, that in my view, the back-and-forth over what will and won’t be applied has already 
sabotaged its intended purpose:  Very few businesspeople will invest in new onshore jobs in 
targeted industries, given the uncertainty about how long any tariff regime will be sustained.  We 


 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
51 of 185
hear that from our steel and aluminum contacts, for example, who report that they certainly 
expect higher prices as a result of the tariffs but don’t plan any new investments to increase 
capacity. 
Second, I am still watching turnover closely.  As I said last time, I see attrition as a more 
important factor than the unemployment rate in generating what we call wage pressures. 
Turnover has been creeping up, but, according to our contacts, it has not yet capitulated, apart 
from skilled construction workers, truck drivers, and certain technology companies.  The Atlanta 
Fed wage tracker for continually employed workers shows increases of 3 percent.  In the mid­
2000s, that was 4 percent.  In the late ’90s, that was 5 percent.  This correlates to the quit rates, 
which have only just now reached levels seen in the mid-2000s and are even lower than their late 
’90s equivalent. 
What explains a turnover rate that is unusually low relative to the tightness of the hiring 
market?  It may be there is just some hangover from the Great Recession, with many workers 
still reluctant to quit jobs they like for a moderate increase in compensation.  And the San 
Francisco Fed has published an interesting piece that points to a reduction in the job-to-job 
transformation rate for 16-to-24 year olds.  I note the author of that piece is here today. 
Third, regarding the yield curve, the markets know and we know that yield curve 
inversions have become a fairly reliable predictor of recessions.  However, I found the Tealbook 
box compelling and hope we’ll start tracking that first quarter–fifth quarter spread as well. More 
broadly, I have, at least, incorporated into my thinking the fact that the yield curve is now just 
structurally flatter than its historical average.  The term premium has been trending lower for 
many years, long-term inflation expectations are lower and more stable, and the marketplace, 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
52 of 185
including us, has a high demand for longer-term safe assets. All that means is that we should just 
take a more holistic view of what we learned from the yield curve as the Tealbook suggests. 
And, finally, for the SEP, my own projections have changed little since March.  Growth 
and inflation are comparable to the Tealbook, with slightly higher unemployment, as I continue 
to imagine we’ll see a bit more productivity growth than some of you expect.  I greatly 
appreciated the exercise that was conducted, looking at the implications of the median SEP path.  
I do think it’s important for us to understand the staff’s assessment of the economic effects of our 
submissions on a continual basis.  If I take those results at face value, it’s reassuring, given the 
economic strength assumed in the Tealbook, that the model doesn’t project that our potential 
path unleashes more inflation.  And, of course, that was my concern.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Overall, incoming data and information from 
business contacts points to continued expansion of the Fourth District, with the largest change 
since our previous meeting on the inflation front. 
In June, the Cleveland Fed staff diffusion index of economic conditions measuring the 
percentage of business contacts reporting better versus worse conditions improved to 44, the 
highest reading since 2014.  Average readings this year are about 10 points higher than the 
second half of last year, consistent with continued strengthening. 
District labor market conditions remain strong.  Year-over-year payrolls continue to 
expand at a 1 percent pace, which is well above trend. The District’s unemployment rate has 
fallen 0.4 percentage point so far this year.  At 4.4 percent, it’s at its lowest level since 2001, and 
it is nearly 1 percentage point below the Cleveland staff’s estimate of the District’s natural rate 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
53 of 185
of unemployment.  Also, the Cleveland staff diffusion index of hiring reached its highest level in 
its near four-year history.  Wage pressures in the District continue to rise. 
Business sentiment remains largely upbeat, with almost one-half of our Beige Book 
contacts expecting economic conditions to strengthen over the next several months.  
Nonetheless, contacts did express some concerns about trade developments and geopolitical 
tensions.  In response to a special Cleveland staff survey, about one-third of firms indicated that 
uncertainty associated with trade negotiations, including NAFTA, and geopolitical developments 
were having a negative effect on their firms. One-fourth reported their customers have changed 
plans because of the uncertainty. 
For example, a director from the auto industry indicated that firms with cross-country 
supply chains were reluctant to invest in new or existing plants for the time being.  An auto parts 
supplier reported that his customers are looking for alternatives to steel. A major multinational 
manufacturer of industrial and electrical equipment reported that current conditions remain 
strong, but that uncertainty about the cost of certain inputs had caused it to modestly scale back 
its planned investment.  Of course, in all things there are winners and losers.  Steel makers 
reported gains due to increased prices, and a consulting firm is enjoying increased demand for its 
services driven by the uncertainty. 
Inflation pressures in the District are building.  The Cleveland staff diffusion index for 
nonlabor input costs rose to its highest level since it started in 2014.  More than two-thirds of our 
Beige Book contacts reported rising input costs.  District firms are raising their own prices in 
response to these higher costs and in the face of stronger demand.  The staff’s diffusion index for 
prices received also rose to its highest level in its four-year history.  More than one-half of our 
Beige Book contacts reported raising their prices.  More firms across a range of sectors tell us 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
54 of 185
they’re finding little resistance on the part of their customers to these higher prices.  And this is 
true even in the very competitive retail sector, which has found it very difficult to raise prices in 
the past. 
For the national economy, the narrative of my forecast is similar to that in March.  But on 
the basis of incoming information, I’ve edged up my growth and inflation forecast and edged 
down my unemployment rate forecast over the projection horizon.  My associated funds rate path 
is slightly steeper than in my March projection.  Over the forecast horizon, I expect growth to be 
above its longer-run trend, which I estimate at 2 percent, and the unemployment rate to fall 
further and remain below its longer-run level, which I estimate at 4.5 percent.  I expect inflation 
to be sustainably at 2 percent by the end of this year and to remain there over the rest of the 
forecast horizon. 
Economic fundamentals remain healthy.  Personal incomes are rising, and household 
balance sheets are healthy.  Monetary policy and financial conditions remain accommodative. 
Fiscal policy will add to growth through the forecast horizon. As anticipated, the first quarter 
slowdown in consumer spending was temporary, and real GDP growth appears to have 
strengthened in the second quarter.  I expect real GDP to grow between 2.5 and 2.75 percent this 
year and next. 
Labor markets have tightened further since the last FOMC meeting, and a range of 
indicators show the economy is operating beyond maximum employment.  Payroll gains were 
well above trend.  Monthly gains this year have averaged over 200,000 jobs, up from an average 
of 180,000 last year. 
The unemployment rate, at 3.8 percent, is at its lowest level in 18 years. The current 
level of the unemployment rate is 80 basis points below the CBO’s time-varying estimate of the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
55 of 185
natural rate of unemployment.  Analysis by the Cleveland Federal Reserve staff shows that this 
unemployment gap is larger than we saw at any point during the expansions of 1982 to 1990 and 
2001 to 2007, and is nearly as large as we saw in the 1991–2001 expansion. 
With growth above trend over the next couple of years, the economy is poised to operate 
beyond maximum employment.  Wages and broader compensation are beginning to accelerate, 
though low productivity growth is likely to temper the pace of inflation.  But inflation continues 
to firm, with year-over-year total PCE inflation at 2 percent, and core PCE inflation is 
1.8 percent in both March and April. Longer-run inflation expectations are stable. 
I thank the Board staff for the work they’re doing to expand our understanding of how 
inflation expectations are formed as discussed in the Tealbook.  In view of the importance of 
expectations for inflation forecasting, I’m looking forward to gaining more insights from this 
important work.  For now, with above-trend real GDP growth continuing and stable long-run 
inflation expectations, I am projecting inflation to be near 2 percent over the forecast horizon, 
and by the end of the year, I expect to be able to say it’s been sustainably at our goal.  In my 
March projection, I thought we wouldn’t get there until the first half of next year. 
I view the risks to my forecast as broadly balanced.  Fiscal policy poses an upside risk to 
my projections over the forecast horizon.  Trade policy is a downside risk, which could grow 
over time. The outlook for foreign economies remains sound, but downside risks have risen in 
the euro area, associated with the political situation in Italy, and financial stresses have increased 
in some emerging market economies that face large current account deficits and external debt 
burdens. 
Some of these developments have supported recent dollar appreciation.  If the 
appreciation were to intensify and be sustained, this could lower real GDP growth and inflation 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
56 of 185
in the United States.  But, for now, I see inflation risk as roughly balanced.  Of course, this is 
contingent on a path of increasing policy rates.  Indeed, my outlook and assessment of risk 
suggest that it’s appropriate for the FOMC to continue on its path of gradually raising the federal 
funds rate. 
My associated funds rate path is slightly steeper than in my March projection, but I would 
still characterize it as a gradual path, given the strength in the economy.  Over the next year, my 
path is similar to the median path obtained from the set of simple monetary policy rules across 
several forecasts that are available on the Cleveland Fed’s website. 
The current real federal funds rate is negative, and it’s below the range of estimates of the 
neutral rate, regardless of whether we are referring to the short-run, medium-run, or long-run 
neutral rate. Despite the uncertainty associated with these estimates, with the economy expected 
to move further beyond full employment and with inflation near 2 percent and expected to be 
sustainably at our goal by year-end and over the rest of the forecast horizon, the case for 
continuing to decrease the level of accommodation is very compelling. 
With estimates of the short-run neutral rate expected to rise over time, if we don’t 
continue to raise the policy rate, we’ll fall further behind.  In the current environment, I think 
there is more risk that we’ll move rates up too slowly than too quickly.  Indeed, the Tealbook 
provides some very useful alternative scenarios that help us think through the risks.  Across all 
but one of these scenarios, the policy prescription entails a rising policy rate path.  This is true 
even in the scenarios entailing global risk.  The exception is the scenario with the domestic 
recession triggered by a sharp correction in asset valuations, suggesting that that’s a situation to 
avoid to the extent possible.  This again argues for continuing to move monetary policy toward a 
neutral stance, especially as we do see signs that asset valuations are elevated. 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
June 12–13, 2018
57 of 185
I also found the alternative view box in the Tealbook to be a very useful reminder that 
soft landings are exceedingly difficult to achieve.  Regarding the Great Recession, the recession 
indicator model described in the Tealbook—which includes term spreads, the term premium, 
credit spreads, and output gaps—began to show elevated recession risks starting in 2006.  But by 
then, it was too late to prevent it using monetary policy.  The lesson I take from this is that we 
cannot become complacent.  The risk of running an overheated economy are high, and, as history 
shows, having to play catch-up with policy does not result in good outcomes.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thanks to Bill Dudley.  Vice Chairman 
Dudley has always contributed outstanding monetary policy thought leadership, and our FOMC 
decisions have been better because of that.  I know I’ve always taken those on board very 
carefully. But I have to say, I’m particularly impressed at how in New York he’s been tough as 
nails.  I don’t know how else you can describe a New York Fed president who roots unabashedly 
for the Boston Red Sox.  [Laughter]  President Williams, there’s hope for your teams too, 
perhaps.  [Laughter] 
All right.  Having said all of that, the reports of my directors and other contacts again 
pointed to strong growth and solidifying inflation trends.  Almost every manufacturer I spoke 
with reported robust demand.  And consumer-facing businesses, like the automakers and 
Discover Financial, also had positive news to report.  On the downside, there was a significant 
intensification of complaints about the uncertain business environment caused by U.S. trade 
policy, and others have reported on that already. Several large manufacturers were quite vocal in 
their concerns over the negative effects of further increases in tariffs or a collapse of NAFTA. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
58 of 185
They also said that uncertainty over possible outcomes is weighing on an otherwise healthy 
investment environment. 
Since they don’t know what the rules will be, it’s hard to know where to invest, which 
can lead to a paralysis.  For example, General Motors told us that they were delaying any major 
capital spending decision that they could.  Of course, the current strong investment data largely 
reflect commitments made in the past.  So I asked my directors how long they thought it would 
take for a continuation of this skittishness to put a dent in the robust capital spending we’ve been 
seeing.  A couple of them ventured a guess that it could start to show up in the hard numbers by 
the end of the year. 
Our financial market contacts with macro-oriented investment strategies also were 
concerned about the somewhat softer outlook for foreign economic growth and the potential 
risks associated with the Italian political situation, but even though these contacts were 
somewhat less sanguine than before, they were not expecting any major effect on the U.S. 
economy unless matters in Italy deteriorated to a point of posing a serious risk to the euro. 
With regard to wages and prices, the comments I heard this time were largely similar to 
last round, though with perhaps some incremental increase in the strength and breadth of the 
reports of building pressures.  At least a few more businesses seemed to be willing to follow the 
Econ 101 script and increase wages to attract and retain workers. 
For the national outlook, our views on growth haven’t changed much.  We still have real 
GDP increasing 3 percent in 2018 and then slowing to a bit under 2 percent by 2020.  Like 
President Williams, we did make a couple of modest changes to the supply side of our forecast.  
My staff’s research on the effects of the increased educational attainment of the workforce led us 
to take onboard a lower estimate of the long-run unemployment rate, going from 4.5 percent to 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
59 of 185
4.3 percent. We also took a more careful look at how the robust investment numbers we have in 
our forecast would influence capital deepening.  In the end, we boosted our forecast of potential 
output growth a bit over the projection period.  By 2020, we now see potential GDP growing a 
little faster than 2 percent.  Some of the investment in capital deepening will be transitory, and 
we still see long-run growth settling in at 1.8 percent.  All in all, our revisions to actual real GDP 
growth, the natural rate of unemployment, and potential output leave us with slightly less 
resource pressure in our current forecast than we had in our March SEP. 
I think the risks to our growth forecast are broadly balanced.  We’ve had some upside 
surprises lately, and we could be underestimating the underlying momentum in the domestic 
economy.  And some simple vector autoregression analysis we've done suggests the impulse 
coming from fiscal policy might be stronger than we have assumed ourselves previously.  On the 
other hand, our forecast does not include any effect due to changes in tariffs or other trade 
policies.  Moreover, given what I heard about business sentiment, I see some downside risks to 
the robust investment rates—more than what we have in our projection. 
As for inflation, the recent data have come in about as we expected, so that’s good news 
for our forecast.  And there are some other reasons to feel more comfortable about the inflation 
outlook.  Commentary given by my business contacts seems consistent with a more firmly 
established inflation environment, and the underlying inflation trend estimated in our Chicago 
bank DSGE model picked up a bit, in response to the most recent configuration of the data.  The 
model seems to interpret a configuration of positive shocks that are helping with underlying 
inflation trends.  However, it’s possible that the model’s revision simply reflects some kind of a 
transitory shock.  There’s a lot of uncertainty regarding that as opposed to a more fundamental 
firming in the inflation expectations trend.  So it’s too early to tell, but that is good news.  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
60 of 185
Furthermore, many survey measures of inflation expectations have not budged off their lows, 
and the nice recovery we have been seeing in TIPS breakevens appears to have stalled somewhat 
recently.  So while we’ve made good progress, I still think policy has a little more work to do to 
anchor inflation expectations symmetrically around 2 percent. 
My forecast has monetary policy gradually moving to a slightly restrictive stance by late 
2019. The appropriateness of this setting is conditional on inflation trends and expectations 
firming to a point that’s consistent with the achievement of our symmetric inflation objective.  I 
think sticking to a gradual path of rate increases in the midst of solidifying inflation data will 
help us reach this necessary goal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL. Thank you. President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I first want to congratulate Bill Dudley for 
his tremendous leadership and a job well done at the Fed, generally, and at the New York Fed, 
specifically. I’ve known Bill for close to 30 years now, and I’ve felt very privileged to have a 
chance to work with him here at the Fed and learn from him regularly.  He has been a great 
friend and adviser and coach, and I just want to thank Bill for all he has done for the country and 
for the Fed. 
The 11th District economy remains strong and continues to expand at a very solid pace.  
Our surveys suggest that economic activity actually accelerated in May.  This acceleration was 
primarily due to improvements in energy, manufacturing, and construction industries.  Texas 
added jobs at a 3.8 percent rate year-to-date, and we expect job growth in the State of Texas in 
2018 to be 3.5 percent despite tight labor markets and numerous reports of labor shortages.  Our 
surveys and discussions with our contacts, in particular, suggest building wage pressures for 
workers in oil field production service as well as in construction and leisure and hospitality 


 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
61 of 185
industries. Our survey wage indexes are well above historical averages. Labor shortages and 
uncertainty regarding trade are certainly two key downside risks to economic growth in the 
11th District. 
Just a comment on energy:  The industry is booming.  Our economists and our industry 
contacts expect crude oil production this year to increase in excess of 1 million barrels a day in 
the United States. Crude oil production in the United States now stands at 10.7 million barrels a 
day.  We expect to end the year in excess of 11.25 million barrels, and I will say, this compares 
with 5 million barrels a day of crude oil production in the United States in 2008.  So we have 
really substantially ramped up.  By comparison, Saudi Arabia crude oil production is right now 
9.9 million barrels a day, and Russian production is approximately 11 million barrels a day. 
On the supply–demand side in the United States—and I note the Tealbook box about the 
effect of rising energy prices—part of the talk is the increasing self-sufficiency of the United 
States.  And to that point, it is our estimate that the United States will consume approximately 
20.6 million barrels a day of oil and other petroleum products in 2018.  On the supply side, we 
estimate, as I mentioned, 11.25 million of crude oil production, another 4.5 million barrels of 
natural gas liquids, and another 1.2 million barrels per day from biofuels production, which is 
obviously a rapidly growing area.  Now, these supply–demand numbers are not perfectly apples-
to-apples because different products are refined and processed into different outputs, but you get 
a sense of the growing energy independence in the United States. 
When you add these numbers up, U.S. oil production represents roughly 80 percent of 
U.S. consumption right now versus approximately 40 percent in 2008—and I’ll talk about this in 
a moment, because we are concerned about a shock in price to the upside—but because of our 
increasing energy independence in the United States, this will mute that shock.  We still believe 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
62 of 185
that the Permian Basin is producing approximately 70 percent of incremental supply in the 
United States, but labor supply constraints, infrastructure constraints, and other physical 
constraints have become much more binding.  Because of this, we think fields outside the 
Permian, such as the Eagle Ford in South Texas and the Bakken in North Dakota and Montana, 
are growing and should grow even more. 
We also note that we saw a spike in oil prices since the previous meeting, and then they 
came back down.  Part of this was due to potential production declines in Iran and actual declines 
in Venezuela.  The decline was also due to discussions by Saudi Arabia and Russia signaling the 
possibility of production increases.  It’s our best judgment that, in the June OPEC meeting, 
OPEC will announce a 500,000 barrel-a-day increase in production.  So they will restore some of 
their cut.  On the other hand, we think this will be just enough to offset the estimated production 
losses on the part of Venezuela and Iran.  So we still think we’re roughly in global oil supply– 
demand balance, despite these different changes, including what OPEC might do. 
As we’ve said before, we still believe that by 2020 or 2021 we will see a real likelihood 
of a global undersupply situation, particularly assuming global demand growth of 1 to 
1.5 million barrels a day.  Shale is going to grow substantially in the United States.  For example, 
the Permian Basin now generates about 3 million barrels a day.  We think that’s going to get to 
8 million barrels a day over the next 17 years or so, but given the rapid decline characteristics of 
shale and the lack of long-lived projects, we still think shale is not going to be able to keep up 
with global demand.  We agree with the box in the Tealbook—last comment on energy—that it 
should be manageable unless the spike is very rapid, in which case it won’t be offset very 
quickly by increased cap-ex.  And we also would note, because of the regional concentration of 
the energy business and the cap-ex, you are going to have 45 states, basically, that are being hurt 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
63 of 185
by an oil price spike and a small number that are being helped.  And it’s our view that this spike 
is likely coming, and we are much more vulnerable to it now—and we’ll get more vulnerable in 
the next couple of years., depending on what else is going on with regard to economic conditions 
in the United States.  We note this because it could come at a very inopportune time, when fiscal 
stimulus is fading and in light of all the other parts of our projection. 
Regarding our own projections for the United States, we continue to estimate real GDP 
growth in the United States of 2.75 percent in 2018.  This is a modest firming in our outlook since 
the previous FOMC meeting and the previous SEP exercise.  We continue to expect—like most 
of you—growth to slow in ’19 and ’20 as fiscal stimulus fades and monetary policy 
accommodation is removed.  We continue to expect the unemployment rate to decline to 
3.6 percent in 2018.  Regarding inflation, we would note, as was mentioned earlier, there were 
revisions to the BEA’s numbers in their May 31 release, which took 0.1 percentage point off 12­
month core and the Dallas trimmed mean.  So that’s the reason the Dallas trimmed mean 
inflation number is now running at 1.7 percent.  It was 1.8, and we still think the core PCE 
inflation is running at 1.8 percent. Having said all of that, it is our estimate that the Dallas 
trimmed mean is going to rise to above 2 percent by either the end of this year or early 2019. 
One other comment.  We did a technology-enabled disruption conference in Dallas, 
which we cohosted with the Atlanta Fed.  It brought together a very diverse set of contributors.  
We were very fortunate to have a number of Fed presidents there, business executives, educators, 
academics, and various members and leaders in the Fed research staff and research directors, 
which made this a very valuable conference. What we learned from this and what was discussed 
is, technology-enabled disruption has been with us for decades, but the advent of the cloud and 
distributed computing power and the power of technology now in the hands of consumers has 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
64 of 185
accelerated the rate of change and is limiting the pricing power of businesses much more than in 
these cycles of the past.  Many business leaders across a range of industries discussed their plans 
to take further steps to replace people with technology and described the changing skills needs 
and changing composition of their workforces. Many discussed the need to adapt to technology-
enabled disruption now as a matter of survival, and noted the need for greater scaling and cost 
cutting in order to adapt to this challenge.  There was a lot of discussion about the fact that 
ongoing technological change is not necessarily inconsistent with a low measured aggregate 
productivity growth.  And a number of academics talked about the fact that it is not unusual to 
observe substantial lags in effects, and they are still hopeful that with improvements, aggregate 
productivity could well catch up to technology-enabled disruption, and that having a lag like we 
might be experiencing now would not be a surprise.  The jury’s out on that. 
The last comment is, I think I was most struck by the discussion of education.  In 
particular, the United States is lagging in terms of early childhood literacy, the percentage of 
third graders who read at grade level, the percentage of high school graduates who are college 
ready, the lagging percentage of college attendees who are graduating within six years, and 
meeting the need for beefing up skills training at high schools and junior colleges.  Many spoke 
about the role of poverty among at-risk groups as helping to explain these lagging statistics, but, 
in particular, the race between a very nimble business community, which can adapt and innovate 
very quickly, and a public education system that has deeply imbedded design factors which keep 
it from adapting at anywhere near the level and rate needed to keep up with changes in business.  
This is an issue at the city, state, and federal levels for policymakers as we look for ways to grow 
GDP in the United States in the years ahead.  I’m glad we’re going to pick up this topic and talk 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
65 of 185
more about it at the Jackson Hole conference, and we’ll obviously continue to keep working on 
this subject. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  Incoming data suggest strong growth for the remainder 
of the year after some softness in the first quarter. Real GDP growth should receive a boost as 
substantial fiscal stimulus comes online over the next two years, leading resource utilization to 
tighten further.  With a tight labor market and inflation near target, the stimulus in the pipeline 
suggests some risk to the upside, while international developments suggest some risk to the 
downside.  I’ll touch on each in turn. 
The latest data suggest consumer spending growth has bounced back after a soft first 
quarter, and strong fundamentals should support that momentum in the period ahead.  Strong 
employment conditions and tax cuts should provide an offset to the increase consumers are 
facing in prices at the pump. Furthermore, business fixed investment is currently estimated to 
have increased at a robust pace of 6 percent at an annual rate, and it’s likely to receive support 
from the increase in oil prices, as we just heard.  Separately, as others have noted, tax and trade 
policy may be exerting countervailing influences on cap-ex. 
The latest data also suggest that net exports will make a positive contribution in the 
current quarter, adding almost 0.5 percentage point to real GDP growth, after being a neutral 
factor in the first quarter.  With ample fiscal stimulus in train, it’s likely that growth will 
continue above the trend rate over the next few years.  A variety of estimates suggest fiscal 
impetus will contribute about 0.75 percentage point to GDP growth this year and next, although 
there is substantial uncertainty about the fiscal trajectory starting in 2020. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
66 of 185
While the global economy grew in sync last year, more recently the picture has become 
more varied.  Political developments in Italy have reintroduced euro-area risk, and financial 
conditions in the euro area have worsened somewhat in response.  But in my discussions with 
market participants, the outsized moves were attributed by them more to technical factors and 
positioning than they were to fundamental unease about redenomination risk.  With some uptick 
in political uncertainty, growth in the euro area and Japan somewhat less rapid than in 2017, and 
inflation still below target in these two economic areas, monetary policies among the advanced 
economies look likely to be divergent.  This, in turn, suggests continued strengthening of the 
dollar.  An environment with a strengthening dollar, rising energy prices, and higher interest 
rates in the United States raise the risks of capital flow reversals in some emerging markets.  So 
far, stresses have been contained to a few vulnerable countries, but the risk of a broader pullback 
bears watching.  In addition, the incoherence and unpredictability of trade policy clouds the 
horizon. A further escalation in measures and countermeasures could prove disruptive at home as 
well as abroad. 
Changes in financial conditions have been mixed since we last met.  Although yields are 
little changed on net, equity prices are up about 5 percent since the May meeting—which is a 
positive sign for the economy.  At the same time, the dollar has appreciated, a drag both on net 
exports and core import prices. Over the intermeeting period, the net effects of these forces is 
likely to be about a wash.  But, taking a step back and considering a longer period: the case is 
somewhat stronger that some net tightening in conditions has occurred since the beginning of the 
year.  And, importantly, the 10-year Treasury yield is up about 50 basis points since the start of 
the year. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
67 of 185
The latest readings on the labor market have been very strong.  Payroll employment, 
which rose 223,000 in April, is now averaging 200,000 per month this year.  That is a step-up 
from the already strong 2017 pace and more than sufficient to keep the unemployment rate 
moving down.  In fact, the unemployment rate has moved down somewhat more rapidly than I 
had projected, moving down after remaining flat at about 4.1 percent for six consecutive months.  
It has registered two consecutive declines and now stands at 3.8 percent.  If it falls another tenth, 
which is likely to happen in the next few months, it will be at its lowest level since 1969. 
The gains in the labor market have been widespread, with the unemployment rate for 
African Americans dropping in May to 5.9 percent, another record low for the series, which 
began in 1972.  Over the past year, the prime-age employment-to-population ratio has moved up 
markedly to 79.2 percent in May, up from 78.4 percent a year earlier.  That’s a welcome 
development, but it still remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-crisis peak. 
The United States is an outlier in the failure of the labor force participation rate for 
prime-age workers to recover to pre-crisis levels. Other advanced economies have seen either 
stability or an increase in the participation rate.  It’s an open question in my mind how many 
prime-age Americans are likely to be drawn back into the labor market by the tighter conditions 
that we’re seeing.  Although it is difficult to know with any precision how much slack still 
remains, I am seeing more evidence that wages are accelerating, although at a measured pace.  
We have now seen average hourly earnings rising 2.7 percent over the 12 months through May, a 
bit higher than over the preceding two years, and that same pattern is true for the ECI, which was 
up 2.8 percent in the first quarter over the previous year—up from 2.3 percent over the previous 
period in 2017 and 1.8 percent the year before that.  For purposes of comparison, in the years 
leading up to the crisis, the ECI rose a bit more than 3 percent at an annual rate, while core PCE 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
68 of 185
was around 2.25 percent.  I am also, like many of you, hearing anecdotes relating labor market 
shortages in specific occupations and sectors, echoing a theme that was prominent in our recent 
Beige Book surveys. 
For inflation, the latest readings have been very encouraging.  With the May CPI data 
that were released this morning in hand, the Board staff now estimate that core PCE prices rose 
1.9 percent over the latest 12 months.  That’s up from 1.5 percent a year earlier.  And overall 
PCE prices increased about 2.2 percent over the 12 months through May.  Other measures of 
core inflation, as was just referenced, such as the Dallas Fed trimmed mean, suggest inflation is 
still running a bit below our target.  And, of course, with recent research highlighting the 
downside risks to inflation and underlying trend inflation that are posed by the effective lower 
bound on nominal interest rates, it underscores the importance of ensuring underlying inflation 
doesn’t slip below target. In that regard, if we were to see a mild temporary overshoot, this 
could well be consistent with the symmetry of our target and may help reanchor underlying 
inflation at target. It is reassuring to see core PCE inflation moving back to target, along with 
market-based measures of inflation compensation retracing earlier declines.  After seven years of 
below-target inflation, it will be important to see inflation around target on a sustained basis to 
be confident that underlying trend inflation is running at 2 percent. 
Finally, I also want to express my admiration for Bill Dudley.  Bill “The Market 
Whisperer” Dudley [laughter] has an uncanny talent for translating “Fedspeak” into “market 
speak” and the reverse. Because he is someone steeped in the intricate interactions of financial 
markets and monetary policy, we all have relied on Bill for his keen insights on how policy 
actions might be interpreted by market participants and, in turn, how markets are positioned.  
The FOMC, and the country more broadly, have benefited immeasurably from his vast 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
69 of 185
knowledge, sound judgment, and perhaps most importantly, his willingness to take action at the 
most challenging moments.  Thank you.  
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with some remarks about Bill. 
I did not, unlike many on the Committee, know Bill before I arrived except from his public 
statements.  And I had come, before knowing him, to have a huge appreciation for the quality of 
his thinking, or what President Williams called his thought leadership.  That was clearly 
grounded in a deep understanding of markets, as well as of the economy—which is rarer than 
one would sometimes imagine.  And then when I was first nominated for this post, Bill, you were 
the first of my new colleagues to reach out to me, to attempt to begin teaching me—other than 
Jay.  And throughout our service, your patient and insightful discussions have taught me an 
enormous amount—about the substance of our work, about the idiosyncrasies of the Fed, and 
about the qualities of a leader.  So as a colleague, I want to thank you for what has been, if too 
brief for me, an enormous personal and professional pleasure.  And as a citizen, I want to thank 
you for your very significant contributions to our country.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you. 
MR. QUARLES. My outlook isn’t much changed from when we last met—for that 
matter from the March SEP, for that matter from a few SEPs before that—because I have long 
been an optimist among this happy band, and the world is catching up.  [Laughter] I remain 
optimistic about the country’s growth prospects, both in the near term and in the long run, 
notwithstanding some increased risk coming from overseas, uncertainty about trade policy.  But 
as Brother Kamin noted in his briefing at the outset of our meeting, not much of that is actually 
currently showing up in the data.  The fiscal boost coming from the tax act will provide strong 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
70 of 185
support for growth both by boosting demand over the next year or so, and also by spurring 
investment and potentially increasing labor force participation, pushing out the productive 
frontier of the economy. 
I can’t remember how often I have bored people here with this, but I am a bit of a techno­
optimist, picking up a bit on some of President Kaplan’s remarks.  There is not an ineluctably 
compelling explanation for the slowdown in productivity growth over the previous decade. 
Nonetheless, when you look at the types of technological advances that appear to be in the 
pipeline for the near term—5G, AI, 3D printing that will advance beyond the capacity to make 
little heads of Lincoln—and compare that with the types of technological advances over the past 
decade—such as varying sizes of iPhones, Facebook, and the Oculus Virtual Reality headset—I 
do believe that there is a reasonable chance that productivity growth in the period ahead could 
shake off some of its recent torpidity, particularly as strong demand leads firms to revamp 
production methods. Obviously, the technological optimism is mostly forward looking.  
Productivity has picked up a bit.  But, really, the past-quarter increase just matches the average 
pace over the past decade. 
Still, all in all, I have a fairly high assessment of the economy’s potential growth rate, at 
least relative to the staff, and on the basis of the SEP of the Committee—although I would hasten 
to add that my estimate remains well below that of some outside commentators who have active 
Twitter accounts. [Laughter] Now, higher potential real GDP growth also suggests a smaller 
output gap in my forecast, relative to the staff, which provides me a little comfort after reading 
the somewhat alarming Tealbook alternative view box on the strong but precarious projection, 
which points out that large positive output gaps are a pretty good indicator of an impending 
recession.  Presumably, that’s because larger output gaps present risks to the outlook as the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
71 of 185
economy runs into constraints that push up prices or perhaps lead to unsustainable financial 
imbalances. 
So what are the signals that the economy is running up against constraints?  Traditionally, 
that would be inflation.  Obviously, inflation is not sending any warning signs currently, either in 
prices or wages.  But maybe in a world with a flat Phillips curve and very well-anchored 
inflation expectations, inflation as a signal that we are pushing the economy where it doesn’t 
want to go, is not as good a signal as it has been in the past.  I certainly am open to other 
indicators of capacity constraints and overheating, in addition to inflation.  We don’t want to be 
in a position of taking advantage of those very well-anchored inflation expectations—again, to 
be pushing the economy where it doesn’t want to be—because we will eventually lose that 
contest, and potentially at great cost. All that said, that really is more of a risk.  In my baseline 
projection, as I said, I’m very optimistic about potential growth.  I expect even relatively strong 
demand growth to be fulfilled without excessive pressure on prices. 
I also think that there may be more slack in the labor market than might be apparent from 
looking at the unemployment rate alone.  In particular, cross-country comparisons show that the 
participation of prime-age workers in the United States, both male and female, have fallen well 
below rates that are seen in many of our advanced-economy peers. Differences in childcare and 
maternity policies may explain some of the lower female participation here, but my 
understanding is that the shortfall in male participation is really very difficult to explain.  And as 
a consequence, there does seem to be some potential for prime-age participation to continue 
moving up, relieving some of the tightness in our labor markets.  Transparency being my halberd 
and my shield, let me make clear that I am SEP participant number nine. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
72 of 185
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 10th District economy continues to 
expand at a solid pace, with signs of further labor market tightening. In our District business 
surveys for May, labor and wage pressures were the top concerns in terms of the potential 
barriers to future growth for services and manufacturing firms.  Labor market concerns ranked 
higher than trade policy, rising interest rates, higher oil prices, and regulation.  In fact, one 
District contact from the hospitality industry noted they have even begun to reach out to former 
employees they had fired to try to fill job openings.  [Laughter]  I’ll give you the name of that 
hotel later. District manufacturing activity remains especially strong.  Our manufacturing survey 
in May posted its highest reading in the entire 24-year history of the survey.  Survey responses 
also pointed to some price pressures, with about one-third of factories reporting an increased 
ability to pass cost increases through to their customers.  Following the run-up in materials prices 
since the beginning of the year, however, particularly for materials linked to trade policy 
discussions, firms expect limited input price increases in coming months but continue to express 
uncertainty due to unresolved trade negotiations and associated rhetoric. 
The outlook for energy—and, to a lesser extent agriculture—has improved.  For the 
energy industry, higher oil prices are supporting investment activity.  An increase in capital 
expenditures is evident across multiple segments of the industry, with substantial growth in 
investment by upstream firms involved in drilling activity.  I expect the growth in investment 
activity to continue through the remainder of the year but to moderate a bit as oil prices stabilize. 
And for agriculture, improvement in both supply and demand factors has boosted the outlook for 
grains.  Drought in Brazil and Argentina reduced corn and soybean production this spring, 
helping to push up prices globally.  With U.S. agricultural exports expected to be the second 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
73 of 185
highest on record this year, the region’s farm sector feels particularly vulnerable to the 
imposition of tariffs on trade flows to our key export markets. 
Regarding the national economy, my outlook for economic growth is little changed since 
our previous meeting, and my assumptions for this SEP look similar to the one I submitted in 
March.  Incoming data point to solid consumption growth in Q2, and nominal wage growth 
appears to be well positioned to support consumer spending over the medium term.  Even so, as 
economic growth moderates over the medium term, I think it is worth monitoring potential 
vulnerabilities for the household sector.  In particular, the personal savings rate has slipped back 
down to 2.8 percent after rising earlier in the year.  And data coming from the survey of 
consumer finances is a reminder that wealth gains over the past decade have been concentrated at 
the very top of the income distribution.  In addition, the most recent release of the Survey of 
Household Economics and Decisionmaking continues to show that a significant share of 
households do not have the resources to cover an emergency expense of $400.  Wealth has been 
slow to recover for many households over the past decade, but a positive sign for the durability 
of the current expansion is that debt service obligations for households remain at low levels.  The 
financial obligations ratio has risen only modestly over the past five years and remains lower 
than levels dating back to 1995. 
Supporting my outlook for strong investment growth the second half of the year, research 
by my staff suggests that robust M&A activity in the United States should lead to future strength 
in business investment. Firms use acquisitions to reposition themselves strategically within their 
industries or to acquire new production and distribution networks and then subsequently make 
new investments to capitalize on these newly acquired assets.  The total number of acquisitions 
increased more than 10 percent last year and surpassed the number of acquisitions at the peak 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
74 of 185
more than a decade ago.  This current high volume of M&A activity observed broadly across 
industries, along with complementary information coming from surveys that point to strong 
business confidence, suggests firms are continuing to seek new production opportunities that will 
promote investment growth over the medium term. 
Labor markets continue to tighten, and the unemployment rate, now at 3.8 percent, is well 
below my assessment of its longer-run level.  Anecdotes given by  business contacts lament labor 
shortages.  In contrast, workers seem increasingly confident about their employment prospects.  
Among the 24 labor market variables that we track in the Kansas City Fed’s Labor Market 
Conditions Index, the variable that made the strongest contribution to the improvement in the 
level of activity over the past six months is the rise in voluntary unemployment.  The share of 
unemployed workers who report that their reason for being unemployed is that they left their job 
voluntarily and immediately began working for their next job is at its highest level since 
November 2000.  Year-over-year inflation looks poised to reach 2 percent this year, with upside 
risk over the medium term as labor markets continue to tighten and the economy continues to 
grow above its trend rate.  Although higher energy prices will boost headline inflation in the near 
term, oil price futures point to softer prices in the next 6 to 12 months, consistent with an 
expectation that OPEC may relax its output restrictions by year-end. 
I continue to view the risks to the outlook at roughly balanced.  On the upside, 
accommodative financial conditions and expansionary fiscal policy could lead to further 
increases in real GDP growth and inflation.  On the downside, trade policy uncertainty and the 
potential for increased financial stress abroad could hamper both foreign and U.S. real GDP 
growth.  Finally, like others, I find judging the signal of a flattening yield curve difficult in 
today’s environment.  It is easy to see a variety of factors as contributing downward pressure to 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
75 of 185
the slope of the yield curve, including central bank holdings of long-term assets, which are 
potentially distorting the signal that a flattening yield curve sends regarding the likelihood of 
future recession.  At the same time, the signals coming from real economic conditions, such as 
payroll growth, manufacturing activity, and aggregate investment, all point to a low risk of 
recession in the coming year.  The dissonance of historical yield curve signals, and a strong 
projection of economic activity in my SEP, warrant monitoring of both financial and real 
economic indicators for potential shifts in the months ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last week we had the opportunity to be the 
guests at a joint meeting of the Kansas City and Atlanta boards of directors.  We had an 
interesting, extensive, and robust discussion about the state of the economy and how things 
might look from now on.  My interpretation of the conversation is that views on the economy are 
quite similar across the two boards.  And I thank the Kansas City team for their great hospitality. 
The barbecue really is good.  [Laughter] 
With respect to the Sixth District directors and contacts specifically, most report 
economic conditions that continue to evolve along a moderate growth path.  Most report solid 
positive growth.  But very few of our contacts reported what one might consider to be a 
transformative pickup in business activity.  We heard the usual mixed bag of reports regarding 
wage pressures but have yet to detect any signals of a material acceleration of pricing pressures. 
It does appear that real GDP growth this quarter will come in above my priors.  But my reading 
of the incoming data is that the apparent second-quarter strength is tied to transitory or 
idiosyncratic factors that don’t signal a shift in momentum for the period ahead. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
76 of 185
On the consumer side, a material part of the April bump up in expenditures on services 
can be tied to a spike in spending on utilities due to unusual weather patterns.  The anecdotal 
reports of my directors and contacts suggest that the more moderate trajectory that is implied by 
stripping utility expenditures out of the overall consumption services data is likely to prevail 
moving forward.  Moreover, the preponderance of reports received from businesses tied to the 
consumer sector indicate no discernible changes in the pace of spending relative to recent trends.  
As a consequence, I am in large part discounting the pickup in the consumer spending data we 
have received since the previous meeting.  As with the consumer spending data, I am not 
inclined to read too much into the recent acceleration in business investment.  A fair amount of 
that pickup is due to a rebound in spending on structures related to the mining and energy sector.  
Excluding energy and oil investment, investment growth is still below 5 percent on a year-over­
year basis, a bit lower than the typical expansion average. 
I began the year with a decided upside tilt to my risk profile regarding real GDP growth, 
owing in large part to an abundance of business optimism following the passage of tax reform.  
However, that optimism among my contacts has almost completely faded away, replaced by 
concerns and frustrations over trade policy, tariffs, and an appearance of disarray coming out of 
the D.C. area—the Board of Governors excepted, of course.  [Laughter] Perceived uncertainty 
has risen markedly, causing many of my contacts to sideline their cap-ex plans.  Projects already 
under way are continuing, but I get the sense that the bar for new investment is currently quite 
high.  I’ll offer just a few examples. 
A large appliance manufacturer indicated that a $250 million expansion plan at a District 
plant has been tabled because of the uncertainty on trade policy.  A regional residential 
construction company reported pulling back on development plans and passing on land 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
77 of 185
acquisition opportunities due to uncertainty about tariffs and their effect on construction costs.  
And to quote one of my directors with ties to the auto industry, “The prospect of tariffs and the 
potential for a trade war have paralyzed our industry.  Planning across all dimensions is at a 
standstill.”  These are not isolated anecdotes.  Though we hear sporadic reports of positive tax-
related investment and, more broadly, ongoing spending on technology enhancements, “risk off” 
seems to be the dominant sentiment of the moment. 
For now, I am hewing reasonably closely to the real GDP growth forecast I submitted 
back in March.  I’ve slightly upgraded my real GDP growth projection this year to 2.7 percent to 
reflect arithmetic adjustments associated with what I think will be transitory strength in the Q2 
data.  So, Governor Quarles, I am catching up—but still slowly. 
I have left my outyear projections alone and moved the balance of risks about my growth 
projection from “upside” to “balanced.” As I noted at the outset, the labor market and wage 
picture is mixed.  Most contacts characterized labor markets as tight, but plans to respond by 
raising wages across a broad range of workers have not risen to a critical mass. I do hear some 
reports of planned accelerations in wages and salaries, but just as often I hear the argument that 
the issue is one of attracting sufficiently qualified workers—a problem that cannot be solved by 
increasing pay.  In these cases, firms are focusing on, one, developing and training internal 
candidates and, two, increasing investments in automation.  Responding to tight labor markets 
with increased spending on training or technology still adds to costs, of course, but reports of 
building price pressures, like reports of accelerating wage pressures, are sporadic. 
Though rising energy prices and anticipated tariff-related costs are generating more 
reports of upward price movement along the supply chain, indications that the affected 
businesses expect to pass costs through to the final consumer are still somewhat limited.  I have 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
78 of 185
marked up my headline inflation forecast for this year by one-tenth, reflecting the recent run-up 
in gasoline prices, but continue to see inflation through the medium term as running at, or 
perhaps modestly above, our 2 percent goal.  Overall, I see the risks to meeting our inflation 
objective as roughly balanced.  As my real GDP growth and inflation projections have not 
changed much since March, my SEP submission maintains the assumption of another 100 basis 
points of rate increases from today. Implicitly, however, in my projection I assume some 
movement in longer-term real interest rates as the expansion continues.  I think things get 
interesting if that doesn’t happen.  But I will return to that point tomorrow. 
And, finally, as this is your last meeting, Vice Chairman Dudley—Bill—I just wanted to 
say that I really appreciated, in my short time here, your perspective on the evolution of the 
economy and also your hospitality.  Like President Harker, I really appreciated your opening 
your doors and being a host and a guide for me.  So thank you very much for that.  I will say, 
even though I have only been here for a year and worked with you for a short time, I have had 
the pleasure to watch you from afar.  And I very much appreciate the leadership you have given 
through very turbulent times and the grace with which you have done it.  So on behalf of 
everyone in the Sixth District, congratulations on retirement.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Moderate growth continues in the Ninth 
District.  Most industries report that they’re expanding, but there are only modest employment 
gains this year to date, an outcome that many contacts attribute to workforce shortages. 
Interestingly, employment actually dipped in all of the states in our District in April.  This might 
just be an aberration.  On the other hand, there are very few signs of accelerating nominal wage 
growth.  There are some signs of rising price pressures at the wholesale level, reports of rising 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
79 of 185
steel and aluminum input costs, and continuing inflation in construction costs, and there appears 
to be a strong capital equipment market.  As others have noted, there are a lot of concerns in my 
region over potential tariff and trade policies.  We’re a very export-sensitive region. 
For the national economy, consumer spending seems to be picking up after a weak first 
quarter.  Since the previous meeting, job gains remain strong, and headline unemployment rate 
has fallen notably, from 4.1 percent to 3.8 percent.  The staff’s view is that slack is exhausted, 
and we are operating well above full employment; to me, that’s very hard to square with modest 
nominal wage growth.  Average hourly earnings and the employment cost index are both running 
at 2.7 percent, up only one-tenth for March.  As others have noted, it’s also hard to square with 
the fact that prime-age labor force participation still appears low and the employment-to­
population ratio appears below pre-recession levels. I continue to think that the staff are too 
pessimistic about trend labor force participation and about the natural rate of unemployment.  
My staff briefed me on interesting work on the natural rate of unemployment done by Aysegul 
Sahin at the New York Fed.  She points out that the average American worker has become older 
and better educated in recent decades, and at the same time, the average American firm has 
become larger and older.  Both of those effects naturally reduce the job separation rate and thus 
the natural rate of unemployment—her estimate is the natural rate could be around 3.5 percent. 
All right. Let’s turn to inflation, which is now close to target.  And 12-month core PCE 
inflation is still is a bit below 2 percent, but I think we’re getting there.  And I feel good about 
that. As we look forward, rising oil prices will put some upward pressure on headline inflation 
and probably some bleed-through to core, but higher nominal wage growth will be required to 
sustain 2 percent over the medium term. So, in my view, we’re close to our inflation target—not 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
80 of 185
quite there.  In my view, we’re probably not quite at full employment but getting closer.  So this 
then turns to how much accommodation we’re currently providing. 
If we raise rates at this meeting, the target range for the federal funds rate will be between 
1.75 and 2 percent.  If we take the Tealbook’s estimate of the neutral rate at face value—at 
0.5 percent—with core PCE running around 1.8 percent, a neutral nominal rate would be around 
2.3 percent. Thus, after this meeting we’re only going to be modestly accommodative.  I could 
argue we might not have much accommodation at all, because the error bands around where 
neutral is are so wide. 
I’m going to talk about this and the yield curve a little bit more tomorrow, but when I 
look at this, I don’t see anything in the data that suggests that we should be in a contractionary 
policy stance.  Again, we’re barely getting to our 2 percent target.  Why are we going to slam the 
brakes on the economy?  I don’t know, so I’m going to talk about that and what the yield curve 
suggests . 
When I think about the risks to the outlook, trade is a big risk that we’ve all talked about. 
It’s out of our control.  It’s very hard to estimate the probability of the different outcomes. There 
are geopolitical risks.  There’s risk in Italy.  There’s the risk at Deutsche Bank that President 
Rosengren talked about.  The one risk that’s within our control is our raising rates too 
aggressively and ending the expansion ourselves. And so, again, I think the yield curve is going 
to give us some signal about that and about going back to neutral as opposed to moving to a 
contractionary stance.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, first of all, thanks everybody for their very kind 
comments.  It’s been very much my pleasure to work with all of you, and to work with the 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
81 of 185
Committee over the past 11.5 years.  I’m glad we’re not having those unscheduled meetings like 
we were in 2007, 2008, and 2009.  [Laughter] 
Today you sort of added to my list of regrets.  It’s too bad these remarks won’t be 
available in the transcript for another 5.5 years.  [Laughter] My mom is 95 years old, and I’m 
sure she’d be delighted to hear what you’ve all said.  I’m going to have more to say at the 
reception this evening, and tomorrow, as we wrap this meeting up. 
I’m where pretty much everyone else is in terms of the outlook.  I don’t think it’s 
changed much since the previous meeting.  Real GDP growth, I think the people probably agree, 
is on a bit firmer track. The labor market continues to tighten.  Inflation is running close to our 2 
percent objective, and I think, generally, the view is that the case for continuing to remove 
monetary policy accommodation remains compelling. 
Where I guess I might be a little bit more in the cautious camp is; I do think the risks to 
the outlook over the longer term have increased.  I’ve discussed at previous meetings how the 
U.S. fiscal outlook is on an unsustainable course.  Because I’ve already talked about that, I’m not 
going to belabor it at my last FOMC meeting. 
The second thing that has been touched on today is that both immigration policy and 
trade policy, I think, are evolving in a direction that’s restraining the productive capacity of the 
economy.  Less immigration means fewer labor resources and slower potential GDP growth, and 
higher trade barriers mean higher prices and lower productivity.  And the productivity effect 
comes from two sources.  First, trade barriers shift production away from areas of comparative 
advantage, and, second, changes in trade rules generate frictional costs as global supply chains 
are disrupted.  As President Bostic talked about, investment is just deferred. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
82 of 185
So, on balance, what we’ve seen recently, in my mind, in terms of immigration and trade 
policy, increases the risk that the economy will overheat in coming years because of less 
productive capacity.  Of course, this assumes that these same actions don’t lead to a sharp 
tightening of financial conditions, because that could be an offset. Well, markets haven’t reacted 
much to the trade shift that’s occurred to date. I’m not really sure what’s causing that.  It might 
be just because it’s difficult to distill, from the rhetoric, where we’re actually going to end up on 
this. 
I think the consequences of any shift in trade policy are only going to play out very 
slowly.  After all, the effect of each individual action typically is very small, in the context of the 
size of the national economy.  But over time I am becoming more worried that these effects 
could accumulate to something more sizable, and, in that case, the negative long-term 
consequences would turn out to be sizable as well. 
There are two other developments people have already touched on: The increasing stress 
on EME economies, most notably Argentina and Turkey—I was actually in Argentina on the 
week that the Argentine peso depreciated about 20 percent—and also the recent developments in 
Italy, which have led to a widening in peripheral European bond spreads relative to Germany.  I 
don’t see large consequences of either of these things for the U.S. economic outlook, at least at 
this point. 
With respect to the pressure on the EMEs, this seems quite different to me than the taper 
tantrum.  It’s not a question of just a shift in animal spirits that is affecting financial assets 
broadly.  The fact is that the fundamentals of several EME countries are poor, with large budget 
deficits and current account deficits. And I think this conclusion is supported by the table in 
Tealbook A and also in the chart that Steve included in his presentation, which shows that 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
83 of 185
investors seem to be discriminating across countries on the basis of the size of their 
vulnerabilities. 
With respect to Italy, I think this is a long-term problem that will manifest itself slowly 
rather than something that is going to blow up over the near term.  That’s because I don’t believe 
the Italian government intends to abandon the euro, or walk away from the European Union.  
And even if they did, I think they wouldn’t have the political support to actually implement that.  
But it does seem to me very possible, even likely, that the government will follow a more 
profligate path on the fiscal side, and over time that could have two really important effects. 
First, I think it would further harden resistance in Germany to taking additional steps, 
such as paying European deposit insurance, that would move Europe toward European 
integration.  And that is problematic because that means all the internal inconsistencies that exist 
within the European Union will persist.  You know, when times are good, those inconsistencies 
don’t matter, but when times are bad, those inconsistencies really have pretty significant 
consequences. 
Second, I also think it increases the risk of a hard stop sometime in the future.  You 
know, if the Italian authorities were to systematically thumb their noses at the budgetary rules of 
the European Union, it’s hard to see how the core European countries could ignore this 
indefinitely.  So I don’t know when it’s going to happen—it’s pretty far out in time—but you can 
imagine at some point that this would actually become quite significant. 
At the New York bank, we’ve made very modest changes to our SEP submissions.  We 
have a slightly stronger growth trajectory in 2018, which takes the unemployment rate slightly 
lower than in our March submission.  As in March, inflation climbs modestly above 2 percent, 
and we continue to have four 25 basis point rate hikes in 2018, three in 2019, and two in 2020.  I 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
84 of 185
guess that’s a taper.  In terms of uncertainties and risk, we have moved up our assessment of 
uncertainty for inflation to “above average,” and that’s due to the uncertainty stemming from the 
consequences of a very tight labor market—we don’t really know how tight is too tight—and the 
uncertainties related to trade and immigration policies that I touched on earlier.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you, Bill.  And thank you, everyone, for a typically 
thoughtful and interesting round of comments.  I hear a range of views on particular issues, but 
also kind of a broad consensus that the baseline outlook hasn’t changed much since the May 
meeting, a consensus that I’m happy to join as well. 
Still, there are interesting underlying dynamics at play.  The U.S. economy looks a little 
bit stronger than it did in May and the outlook for advanced foreign economies a bit weaker.  
Emerging market economies remain strong despite weakness and stressful conditions in a few 
countries, and global downside risks may also have increased. 
To begin on the domestic front:  Data received over the past several weeks have 
corroborated our view that the slowing that was evident at the time of our May meeting was 
transitory.  In fact, the incoming data have since been a bit better than expected.  Information 
from the second quarter now points to real GDP growth with a “three” handle or perhaps even 
higher, according to some.  Looking ahead, fundamentals continue to paint a very favorable 
picture, including strong job growth, fiscal stimulus, robust household and business confidence, 
and still-accommodative financial conditions. 
As many of you noted, pointing to a range of indicators, the labor market has tightened 
further and, indeed, has surprised to the upside.  Payroll gains have remained quite strong, and 
the unemployment rate is now five-tenths lower than a year ago.  In addition, the participation 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
85 of 185
rate has been range bound since October 2013, another sign of strength conditional on downward 
demographic trends. 
Core inflation moved up close to 2 percent, consistent with our well-telegraphed 
expectations.  Headline inflation looks set to temporarily overshoot our goal, reflecting recent 
increases in energy prices.  And, as a number of you noted, this welcome, but so far brief, return 
to 2 percent does not mean that we’ve achieved our broader goal of inflation around our 
symmetric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis. 
Regarding the international front, the data show a modest weakening of momentum 
among advanced foreign economies.  One question is how much signal to take from the recent 
slowing of economic activity in the euro area and in the United Kingdom.  Part of that slowing 
can be attributed to transitory developments, like the weather and labor strikes, but softer 
readings coming from surveys of purchasing managers as well as some tightening of financial 
conditions suggest that more persistent factors may also be at play. 
And the outlook for a few vulnerable emerging market economies remains bleak, with 
Argentina and Turkey, and now Brazil, under intense market scrutiny.  Growth among other 
EMEs has remained robust, however, and in some cases has surprised to the upside, especially in 
Asia.  So that’s a generally bright outlook, and I’ll turn to the risks. 
Domestically, we continue to hear accounts of labor shortages, rising material costs, and 
capacity limits, which surely ought to be putting some upward pressure on inflation.  And some 
of you are hearing more from business leaders about passing through these costs into prices.  
Although both wage and price increases have remained moderate, inflation risks are now more 
decidedly two sided.  Still, looking beyond inflation risks, there could also be some benefits 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
86 of 185
flowing from having a tight labor market as some workers at the margins are drawn into the 
labor force. 
Our business contacts around the country—I’ve heard this very widely—continue to 
mention risks, with an increasing concern associated with trade policy. It’s clearly a growing 
concern, and, although we haven’t yet seen a clear effect on confidence, spending decisions, or 
the outlook, that risk is really there now. 
As for international risks, many of you have commented on political developments in 
Italy, which are adding to uncertainty and could produce a more protracted slowing in 
continental Europe.  This does seem more of a longer-term problem, as Bill indicated. While the 
new government has now expressed commitment to remaining in the EU, there is a risk of 
disruptive developments. 
Many of you also discussed the vulnerability of EMEs to a stronger dollar, higher U.S. 
interest rates, and higher oil prices.  So far, investors appear to be differentiating between 
countries with better economic fundamentals and those in more precarious conditions, but we 
have seen broad outflows from EME funds and downward pressure on equity markets and 
currencies. There is clearly a risk of a more general flight from EMEs that could have negative 
implications for the economy. 
Briefly, regarding policy, it seems that the modest changes to the outlook provide little 
reason to alter our course of gradual rate increases.  The case for that approach is founded on the 
need to balance the risk of moving too fast, which could leave inflation short of a sustained 
return to our symmetric goal, versus the risk of moving too slow—which could lead to an 
overheated economy with too high inflation or material financial imbalances. In my view, it will 
be appropriate to continue on our gradual path by raising the target range for the federal funds 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
87 of 185
rate by 25 basis points at the conclusion of tomorrow’s meeting.  So thanks again for a 
thoughtful discussion, and we will, I guess, go ahead with Thomas’s monetary policy briefing 
and a Q&A on that before we break for our reception. 
MR. LAUBACH.4  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also like to start by 
thanking Vice Chairman Dudley for his leadership and advice to myself and many of 
my colleagues in many policy discussions.  I will be referring to the handout labeled 
“Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 
With alternative B, the Committee would continue to communicate its expectation 
that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will remain appropriate to sustain a 
strong labor market and inflation near 2 percent by balancing the risk of overheating 
against the risk of failing to return inflation to 2 percent on a sustained basis.  As 
noted in the upper-left panel of your exhibit, the changes in alternative B are intended 
to keep your communications in line with your expectation that, along this path, 
monetary policy will likely move from being accommodative to being somewhat 
restrictive and that the federal funds rate will, before too long, run at or above levels 
you expect to prevail in the longer run.  In your latest projections, 9 of you anticipate 
that, by the end of 2019, the federal funds rate will exceed your estimates of its 
longer-run normal value, and 12 of you project this gap to widen to between 0.4 and 
1.4 percentage points by late 2020.  These projections imply that, at some point 
further out, the slope of the expected path of your policy rate will be negative. 
In light of your ongoing discussions about the potential information content of the 
yield curve for the likelihood of a future recession, the staff provided some further 
analyses on the topic in last week’s Board briefing and in the two Tealbook boxes 
that were already mentioned today.  One of our objectives was to try to distinguish 
between the signal that the slope of the yield curve and other financial variables are 
sending now, and the signal they will likely send in the future, if interest rates evolve 
as assumed in the Tealbook baseline.  The ability of inversions of the yield curve to 
forecast recessions likely arises from two kinds of historical situations.  In the first, 
monetary policy had been tightened with the intention of slowing growth in aggregate 
demand, in order to reduce inflation.  In the second situation, monetary policy was in 
a neutral or slightly restrictive position when the economy was hit by an adverse 
shock to aggregate demand.  In either situation, market participants expected the 
federal funds rate to be reduced substantially, and the yield curve inverted because the 
resulting negative slope of the expected path of short-term rates was sufficient to 
overcome a long-horizon term premium that was substantially positive at the time. 
Presumably, it is the expectation of substantial reductions in short-term rates that 
explains the well-documented power of the yield curve inversions to predict 
recessions. 
4 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
88 of 185
One of the Tealbook boxes provides a closer look at which part of the maturity 
spectrum gives rise to this predictive power.  The analysis in the box hypothesizes 
that the portions of the yield curve that are most sensitive to changes in the expected 
path of monetary policy in the near or medium term should most clearly reflect 
market participants’ expectations for recession and thus provide the sharpest 
inference for predicting recession.  Another benefit of focusing on near-term portions 
of the curve is that doing so largely sidesteps the issue of the secular decline in the 
long-horizon term premium.  The box shows a test of this hypothesis that involves 
estimating probit regressions and comparing the forecasting power of a near-term 
spread—defined as the five-quarters-ahead forward rate minus the one-quarter-ahead 
rate—with that of longer-term spreads.  The upper-right panel plots a longer-term 
spread, the gap between 10-year and 2-year Treasury yields, in blue, along with the 
near-term spread, in red.  Also shown is the near-term expected slope of the federal 
funds rate path, the red dotted line, obtained from the Blue Chip survey.  Over the 
past few decades, the near-term spread and survey-based expected slope of the funds 
rate have indeed nearly moved in lockstep—suggesting that the near-term spread is a 
relatively clean indicator of expected monetary policy. 
The middle-left panel shows a “butterfly chart” documenting how the near-term 
spread evolved in the quarters leading up to recessions since 1973.  In all cases, the 
near-term spread turned negative at least three or four quarters in advance of the onset 
of recession. In most cases, the near-term spread fell to a level around minus 
1 percentage point before the recession. 
In the middle-right panel, the red line shows the probability of recession estimated 
using the near-term spread, while the blue line shows the probability using the long­
term spread.  The near-term spread model shows somewhat sharper spikes before 
recessions compared with a model using only the long-term spread.  When both the 
near- and long-term spreads are included as explanatory variables, the near-term 
spread retains a large and significant coefficient, whereas the coefficient for the 
longer-term spread falls to essentially zero.  The more general finding is that the near-
term spread appears to provide at least as clear a signal of oncoming recessions as 
that provided by longer-term spreads.  That said, with only six recessions in the 
sample, one cannot say with much confidence that one indicator is better than 
another.  Currently, neither model predicts a likelihood of recession that is materially 
above the unconditional mean for this sample, shown by the horizontal line.  
Nevertheless, one might reasonably hope that, for predicting future recessions, the 
near-term spread would be more robust to secular changes in the long-horizon term 
premium. 
The lower-left panel depicts the estimated relationship between the near-term 
spread and the probability of recession.  The horizontal axis shows a range of values 
for the near-term spread.  The vertical axis shows the probability of recession 
corresponding to each level of the near-term spread as estimated using the probit 
model.  The most recent observation is shown by the green square.  This spread is just 
below the historical mean, the vertical line, and implies a recession probability of 
about 15 percent. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
89 of 185
What does the near-term spread model imply for the probability of a recession 
along the median SEP path?  To answer this question, one must make an assumption 
about how the federal funds rate will evolve beyond the level of the SEP median at 
the end of 2020, which is 50 basis points higher than the median longer-run value.  
Suppose that the federal funds rate declines smoothly beyond 2021 at a rate of about 
25 basis points per year.  In this case, the near-term spread would reach a minimum of 
about minus 25 basis points sometime in 2021.  As shown by the yellow diamond in 
the lower left, at that point the model would predict a probability of recession of 
about 50 percent.  This level is notably higher than the unconditional probability, but 
still lower than the level observed before past recessions. 
The lower-right panel offers some implications for your discussion of the 
appropriate path of future monetary policy.  First, recessions are notoriously difficult 
to predict, in part because they are, fortunately, not all that frequent, and thus the 
predictions of any single model need to be treated with caution.  The model I 
discussed has the virtue that it uses the expected path of the policy rate over a 
relatively short horizon to estimate the probability of recession.  It suggests that a 
modest overshoot of the federal funds rate as shown by the SEP median in 2020 could 
imply a heightened risk of recession beyond that point.  From a longer-term 
perspective, it would appear that, if a period of restrictive monetary policy will prove 
to be appropriate, gradually raising the federal funds rate above its longer-run value 
and then gradually lowering it would imply a lower likelihood of a recession than 
would be implied by a path that involves raising the federal funds rate more rapidly 
and then reducing it more rapidly. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks.  The May 
statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 9 of the handout.  And I 
would like to direct your attention for a moment to the implementation note on page 8 
where you see at the top of the page some red language.  I just want to bring this to 
your attention.  The intention of this language is to reflect in the statement more 
broadly the communications that you had in the minutes of the May meeting.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  We’ll have question and answer. Maybe we’ll have just a 
second to read this first. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Sure. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  Why don’t we take 30 seconds to read this, and then 
we’ll have Q&A.  [Pause]  Okay.  Questions or comments for Thomas?  Jim. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the staff’s work on the box in 
Tealbook A called “Don’t Fear the Long-Term Spread,” which is reiterated here in exhibit 1 of 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
90 of 185
Thomas’s presentation.  And I will just give you my take on it.  I think it’s a very nice analysis.  I 
think it’s an innovative thing to look at the short-term spread instead of the long-term spread.  I 
think there may well be near-term information there.  You know, it’s very intuitive that markets 
are looking only one year ahead and then predicting a decline in the policy rate, and the reason 
they are expecting that is that they think weaker economic conditions are ahead. 
I would also say, just eyeballing these pictures, that the correlations are very high 
between the short-term spread and the long-term spread, so they are probably very collinear and 
telling us more or less the same thing. Also, if you look at the implied probabilities of a 
recession, they are highly correlated.  So it looks like you are getting essentially the same signal 
from the two types of inversion, but, nevertheless, the more the merrier. Why not look at more 
than one signal? 
And the overall message to me is that neither is predicting recession ahead today, which I 
think is consistent with what everyone is saying about this issue.  My concern in trying to have 
this debate about yield curve inversion is that we have it before we get to that state of being in 
inversion so that we go in with our eyes open, if we want to go to that state of the world.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is the near-term versus the long-term 
spread.  The thing I struggle with is, you talked about how the near-term spread has the 
advantage that you take out the secular decline in long-term real interest rates. But to me, those 
are really important in assessing where we are, relative to neutral.  So if I just think about what 
the near-term spread is telling us, and if the near-term spread inverts, it’s already too late.  It’s 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
91 of 185
like President Mester said—by the time the near-term spread inverts, the recession is basically 
already baked, and there’s nothing we can do about it. 
So, to me, I’m looking at the long-term spread as an indicator—given these wide ranges 
of where neutral could be—as providing us with some information about where monetary policy 
is relative to neutral.  Are we, in fact, moving to a contractionary stance?  And if we’re doing so, 
we should do so with our eyes open and make a conscious decision to do so.  Push back on me, 
though.  I mean, am I misinterpreting the long-term spread? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I’ll be glad to “push a little bit back.”  [Laughter]  I think the point that 
I tried to stress was not so much that the near-term spread would abstract from a decline in long­
term real interest rates.  It’s more about abstracting from changes in long-horizon term 
premiums.  That is part of the discussion of whether the secular decline in long-horizon term 
premiums is a particular challenge for any long-term spread that keys off, say, the 10-year yield 
as one element.  And I think, in part, this is really an unsettled issue because, while we can 
historically try to run horse races, it is the case—unfortunately, for this purpose—that the 
previous recession was a long time ago, and since then the long-horizon term premium has 
declined a lot. 
So the jury is really still out on whether you should control for the changes in the long-
horizon term premium or not, which is what the near-term spread does.  It’s not so much about 
long-term real interest rates as it is about the term premium.  That’s one piece.  The other thing is 
that I’m not quite sure whether I would quite go so far as to say, when the near-term spread 
inverts, it’s too late.  As you can tell, a near-term spread of zero, say, doesn’t lead yet, according 
to the model, to a high recession probability.  So it needs to invert, I would say, measurably.  So 
if it’s just going a little beyond flat, that doesn’t, according to this model, necessarily signal a 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
92 of 185
recession.  And if you look at the butterfly chart, in most instances, you know, it was minus 0.5 
percentage point or more negative. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Can I follow up? 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Please. 
MR. KASHKARI.  But how do you think about—you know, my staff went back through 
previous FOMCs and previous discussions of the yield curve and term premiums, et cetera, and 
it’s remarkable.  In previous episodes, just as President Bullard said, “This time is different” was, 
all around, why this term premium is different now.  And then we went into recession.  And so 
I’m very loath to make these adjustments that you’re talking about. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I would need to look at those discussions in the transcripts. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks.  Vice Chair. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Look, I think this is terrific. I completely agree with 
this.  I think it makes perfect sense. The yield curve inversion is all about the tightness of 
monetary policy.  And by focusing on the short term, you’re really focusing on market 
expectations of the tightness of monetary policy. And while it’s true that these have been 
collinear over a long period of time, they might not be as collinear now because of the fact that 
the term premium has been moving a lot—a lot—over recent years. 
So, you know, you can completely subscribe to the term yield curve version of the story, 
but I think what Thomas is doing is handing you a better tool to evaluate it, because it’s really 
focused on the tightness of monetary policy, which is the core of why the term “yield curve 
inversion” has actually historically been so reliable as a signal.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Williams—I see a bunch of hands.  Actually, Neel. 


 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
93 of 185
MR. KASHKARI. Forgive me if I’m misunderstanding.  Why does the near-term spread 
give us a good signal about the tightness of monetary policy? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Because people think that the federal funds rate today is 
high relative to whatever the federal funds rate is going to be in the future.  Why do they think 
that?  Because they think that the monetary policy is tight enough to slow the economy down 
significantly, and so they expect that the Federal Reserve will respond by lowering interest rates 
in the future. 
MR. KASHKARI.  But do you think it’s a signal relative to where they think monetary 
policy is going to be one year from now, not where they think it’s going to be relative to some 
concept of neutral over, say, the medium term?  I don’t see that as giving us better information. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, the reason they think rates are going to fall is 
because they think policy is tight relative to the state of the economy.  So it’s expectations.  The 
markets are making a judgment about what they think monetary policy setting is today relative to 
what it needs to be in the future. If they think the federal funds rate is going to be lower in the 
future, they are basically saying, “Gee, policy is tight,” and that means there is a high risk of 
recession. Now, it doesn’t mean that the markets necessarily have to get it right. I mean, there is 
also the possibility of the markets getting it wrong.  But the track record seems to be that the 
markets generally get it pretty much right. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Loretta has a two-hander, I think. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Two-hander? 
MS. MESTER.  Oh, I don’t know, I don’t know.  [Laughter] One. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  I’m counting two.  Okay, please go. 


 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
94 of 185
MS. MESTER.  Well, maybe it’s a two-hander because Neel had mentioned my name.  
[Laughter] So my comment about it being too late was actually about looking at the model in the 
other box, which was David Miller’s box.  And there it’s very interesting, because, remember, 
it’s not only the slope of the yield curve, it’s also the term premiums in that model.  And credit 
spreads are in that model, and the output gap is in that model.  And I think that’s something to 
think about. I mean, it’s great to have the yield curve slope as an indicator, but we have other 
models that include other things that I think are relevant, because what bothers me about this 
yield curve thing is it’s a correlation.  And it’s a correlation that seems robust, I grant you that.  
But I think we have to get behind that and actually look at what is the cause of it.  And so I kind 
of like this work in the Tealbook that David Miller did, because it tries to get a little bit about 
other factors that are important.  And in that case, it was too late to really use monetary policy to 
address what was going on in the Great Recession. 
I think this is an interesting conversation, but we have to be careful about looking at 
correlations and not really asking ourselves, well, what caused it?  If we get into a situation 
where we get behind the curve in terms of the output gap, I think that’s where we waited too 
long.  And so that’s my concern here. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Williams.  Jim, is that a two-hander? 
MR. BULLARD. No, go ahead. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Go ahead. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I actually just want to make a couple of quick comments.  First of all, 
I agree with the point that this expectation in the market that we are going to cut the rate over the 
next year is clearly a sign that something’s happened that has convinced the markets that policy, 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
95 of 185
at least now, is too tight, and, therefore, the economy is going to weaken, and, therefore, the 
FOMC is going to cut rates.  That is a similar thing, I think, as the inverted yield curve. 
I do have one word of caution about the interpretation of this box, and then even 
Thomas’s presentation, and that is that if you think about what this regression is actually doing, 
it’s going through history.  This gets to President Mester’s point about causation versus 
correlation. What is happening in time is, presumably, the FOMC is doing the best it can to set 
monetary policy.  You get a negative shock.  The negative shock hits.  Markets look and say, 
“Okay.  Given the effect of that shock, will the stock market collapse or the housing market 
collapse?  We expect the Fed to lower interest rates.” That’s correlated with the fact that a 
recession follows that. 
So I would caution a bit about reading this final box that Thomas put out and also reading 
the final bit in the box in the Tealbook, which is actually doing the reverse.  It’s saying that we 
expect to cut interest rates gradually.  Therefore, the probability of a recession is low.  I don’t 
think you can actually draw that conclusion, because what you’re doing is taking a history in 
which there is a shock, people expect us to cut, and that’s followed by a recession, and then 
saying, “Well, as long as we cut interest rates slowly, we are less likely to have a recession.”  I 
don’t think that’s what you were implying.  That was implied a little bit, quite honestly, in the 
Tealbook box, that this probability will be low because we will be cutting interest rates 
gradually.  An important part of this analysis is, it’s not actually about tight monetary policy—I  
agree with Bill that that’s the right interpretation—but the mechanics of it is cutting interest 
rates, and so be careful about running it forward in time. 
The last thing I will mention, just because I feel I have to, if you run the same experiment 
that you all ran, and we have all now run using r minus r* or using the Holston-Laubach­


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
96 of 185
Williams estimates, you are also finding the same kind of thing. There I actually feel that the 
interpretation is pretty straightforward.  When, for whatever reason, the real interest rate gets 
significantly above the neutral interest rate, the probability of a recession after that is somewhat 
higher.  And I think the interpretation again is that there is a shock that hits as monetary policy is 
relatively tight, and the recession follows from that. 
So I would go back to this point.  We have a lot of these models:  r minus r*; the 
forecasts of the short-term interest rate, what we call the short; the near-term spread; we have a 
long-term spread—all of these are telling us, I think, basically the same kind of things.  But I 
would be a little bit cautious in interpreting them literally when thinking about what the 
probability of a recession is, say, in three years.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.  
MS. BRAINARD.  Two things.  I think this is very interesting.  The distinction between 
the 10-year and the 2-year yield in terms of term premiums being depressed and moving around 
is not actually that clean a distinction, because the 2-year term premium has also been quite 
negative and moving around quite a bit.  So I’m not sure it does accomplish what you are setting 
out to do, although the correlations are interesting. 
And the second question is, when you use the difference between the SEP forecast and 
the long-run federal funds rate as a proxy for the yield curve, you are essentially assuming that 
the term premium is not going to change, and yet I think we have some staff estimates that 
suggest the effects of our balance sheet rolloff would more than compensate, if in fact those 
estimates turned out to be the case. So I’m just interested in whether you actually don’t any 
longer believe that we are going to see any effects on the term premium of that ongoing balance 
sheet rolloff. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
97 of 185
MR. LAUBACH.  Far be it from me not to believe in this any longer.  We show it to you 
in every Tealbook.  However, I would imagine that these effects are scaling up roughly with the 
maturity.  So the term premium effect, we think, is most concentrated, say, in the range of 10 
years. You’re right that the analysis here is taking a little bit of a simplified approach, in that it 
interprets this near-term spread as mostly unaffected by term premiums, and that’s certainly not 
literally true.  Again, the dashed line in the upper-right panel provides you with some measure to 
which that may be true.  There is probably some term premium in there, but one would think that 
the term premium swings and also the secular decline are smaller than in the 10-year rate. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Yes.  Your point on the bottom-right panel, which is gradually raising 
the fund rate, then gradually lowering it, would lessen recession risks.  I referenced that just a 
second ago. Can you just explain that again?  I didn’t follow your rationale when you were 
explaining it. 
MR. LAUBACH.  President Williams may disagree with this, but it is taking the model 
literally to say, well, the yield curve slope is mechanically related to the probability of recession. 
One possible explanation for that could be that it really measures the degree of restrictiveness of 
policy.  And when monetary policy is relatively restrictive, for example, the probability of falling 
into a recession may be higher, the reason being that it then takes smaller adverse shocks in order 
to tip the economy into recession.  So if you then follow that logic, because this curve here is not 
linear—so if you, say, induced for one year a spread of minus 50 basis points, that pushes you to 
a probability of recession of roughly 80 percent, according to this figure, whereas the minus 25 is 
keeping you at a lower level. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
98 of 185
MR. BARKIN.  If you moved it and you didn’t like the outcome, you could just move it 
back, is your—okay. 
MR. BOSTIC.  And move it in small amounts. 
MR. BARKIN.  Right.  Got it. 
MR. LAUBACH. Yes. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The only thing I’d add is the suggestion for 
a conversation at some future date, because that argument assumes a continuity in the 
smoothness, that if you add on a behavioral lens—if the market believes, whether it’s right or 
not, that this correlation exists, and it, in fact, is causal, and if that belief becomes cemented in 
the minds of participants, that when things happen, they happen fast.  Right?  They don’t happen 
in a nice, smooth manner. 
I think a conversation at a future date is, again, to put a behavioral economic, behavioral 
finance lens on this and ask if there’s a sufficient number of market participants that actually 
believe—and I think right now if you listen to the pundits on CNBC, they clearly believe this is 
causal, they don’t believe it’s just some correlation—what does that imply for policy? 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  I actually agree completely with what President Harker just said.  The 
market does believe this is causal, and if they see it, they’re going to freak out and act 
dramatically. To me, though, I don’t think this is causal.  I’m more in the President Williams 
camp, and it raises the question for me about whether we have an obligation to try to have this 
conversation with the market to try to get to a different understanding about what the nature of 
this relationship is. Because if we believe something that’s different from what they do, that 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
99 of 185
increases the likelihood that there’s going to be a misinterpretation of what we’re doing, and we 
will not get the market response that we’re hoping for. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Again, I think this is a great discussion.  I just want to augment it by, 
one, noting the observations on this blue line in the top right-hand figure here, which is the 
spread between the 2-year and the 10-year rates.  And I want to point out the mid-1990s 
situation, because that was one that influenced me.  And my point is that this can be useful even 
beyond the recessionary situation.  So if you remember that in 1994, this Committee raised the 
policy rate 300 basis points, which seems inconceivable today.  But we raised the policy rate 300 
basis points in an attempt to get back to normal. 
And in 1995, the risk of a recession seemed higher.  The real-time data actually seemed 
very risky at the time, and it looked like maybe we would go into recession.  That was skirted, 
and as you all see here, this spread never did go negative, all the way through the rest of the 
1990s.  And it set up one of the best periods that we’ve had in U.S. macroeconomic history.  So I 
think that was a case in which we probably weren’t talking yield curve as much at that time, but 
that was a case in which we did normalize, but we stopped somehow at the right time.  And we 
got a good situation for the rest of the 1990s, with a healthy upward slope to the yield curve, but 
with a policy that was just right to get inflation really right at 2 percent through that whole 
period.  So I think this is maybe a little more useful than just trying to predict recessions.  That’s 
the point. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  I’m going to call on myself with a two-hander.  I’m not sure if 
that’s a legal move. [Laughter] 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
100 of 185
Reacting to President Harker’s comment: I think there’s a disparity of views around the 
table about this, partly because people are still thinking their way through the issue.  So I think if 
people are going to talk about it publicly, I think it would be really healthy if people were to say, 
first of all, that there is a range of views, and, second, that it’s one of several things that we look 
at, not one.  And so I really think, as people share their views on this, it would be useful if that 
could be part of what we all say, and then we can have disparate views about what we think 
overall.  So with that—President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  It’s a slightly different question, if that’s okay. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Please. 
MR. EVANS.  For Tom as well.  [Laughter]  Looking at the black line in the middle-left 
panel, the near-term slope of the yield curve—this is a butterfly chart—the black line is just 
beautiful.  I mean, it’s just exactly what you would want if this was going to be an indicator of 
the recession.  And then I looked at it, and I saw that it said 1973, and, you know, maybe it’s 
because I’ve been sitting next to President Williams for so long and it’s the last time I’m going to 
have the chance to do this, but the question I have for Thomas is:  Who won the World Series in 
1972?  Was it the Oakland A’s or the Cincinnati Reds? [Laughter]  That could be completely 
determinative [laughter], if I have learned anything.   
PARTICIPANTS. Oakland A’s. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Was it the A’s?  That was when they “three-peated.” 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Are there additional comments? Hearing none, we will now 
adjourn downstairs for an event honoring Vice Chair Dudley.  See you tomorrow morning here 
at 9:00.  Thanks very much. 
[Meeting recessed] 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
101 of 185
June 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All right.  Good morning, everyone.  Let’s resume now with 
our go-round on monetary policy, and we’ll begin with President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B. Under a 
forecast in which the unemployment rate significantly undershoots our estimate of the natural 
rate, and, on the other side, we are likely to overshoot our inflation target, it is appropriate to 
raise the federal funds rate at this meeting.  It is certainly the action expected by the market. 
The decision for this meeting seems straightforward, but the path forward is a bit more 
complex.  To my eye, the path of the federal funds rate in the SEP still seems somewhat shallow. 
To be sure, a steeper path than the SEP path risks financial turmoil and the possibility of causing 
the recession we wish to avoid.  On the other side, however, allowing significant macroeconomic 
imbalances to linger for years risks a more pronounced unraveling.  We’re in a difficult position, 
attempting to set policy so as to balance these risks and engineering a policy rate path that is not 
too steep, not too shallow.  I do not claim that choosing a path is easy, but my sense is that, at 
present, we are headed for a policy rate path that is somewhat too accommodative and which will 
allow imbalances to linger for too long.  Accommodative monetary policy at a time when the 
unemployment rate is already 3.8 percent and fiscal policy is expansionary, is a recipe for 
moving the economy further into a state of significant imbalance.  If there were no inflationary 
or financial implications associated with such an imbalance, I would be all for it, but assuming 
only modest wage, price, and asset price movements in such an environment seems risky.  
There are, of course, other risks to the outlook—financial risks, trade risks, and 
geopolitical risks—that could slow down the economy, perhaps enough to cause us to reverse 
course on monetary policy.  But unless those risks become reality, the primary risk that I see is 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
102 of 185
that our baseline forecast expects an economy that is running “hot” and, quite likely, “too hot,” 
threatening the expansion’s sustainability.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me join with others in congratulating 
Bill Dudley on his retirement. I’ve had a 10-year association with Vice Chairman Dudley.  He 
used to sit over here, and then he moved over there.  He’s been my colleague on the Committee 
and at the COP.  Over the past decade, I visited New York many, many times and worked from 
the New York Fed many of those days, and I really appreciate Bill’s hospitality and the time on 
those occasions to talk over issues facing the Committee. 
I felt that Bill did very important work in “de-imperializing” the New York Fed and 
better integrating the Bank with the rest of the System, which I think has been a longstanding 
issue for the Federal Reserve, and Bill did a lot to break that down.  I also think Bill did 
important work for the Federal Reserve internationally at Basel and on key issues like LIBOR 
reform, but also many other issues.  Whenever I got feedback from abroad on Bill, it was always 
extremely positive, and I think he did a great job in representing the Fed on that dimension.  Bill 
also played an important role on the FOMC, in my opinion.  The Committee needs a financial 
markets view to complement the business view and also to complement the academic or models-
based view of the economy.  In my opinion, the Committee couldn’t have had anyone better 
placed than Bill Dudley to provide that view over the past 10 years.  So congratulations on your 
retirement. 
Mr. Chairman, generally speaking, I think we’re in a good position today, but that we 
may soon become too “hawkish.”  This is because it doesn’t take that much to be “hawkish” in 
today’s global interest rate environment.  Robust economic growth is probably temporary, driven 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
103 of 185
in part by temporary fiscal policy effects.  Robust labor markets are welcome and are unlikely to 
produce meaningful responses of inflation over the forecast horizon, under current estimates of 
the Phillips curve. The Committee has already been preemptive and is not at all lagging behind 
macroeconomic developments. 
Market-based inflation expectations remain low when adjusted to a PCE basis.  These 
expectations already incorporate all available information, including strong labor markets, fiscal 
policy, and an expectation of monetary policy more dovish than the Committee’s SEP median. 
This suggests that inflation is not about to rise meaningfully.  The Dallas Fed trimmed mean 
inflation rate is 1.7 percent year over year—about where it has been for many years. 
Reading some details overnight, I think the recent CPI report was affected by energy 
prices, with some bleed-through, probably, to core PCE inflation.  That’s one reason I want to 
switch from core PCE inflation to the Dallas Fed trimmed mean. 
A yield curve inversion is lurking, and, if it occurs, it would be because this Committee is 
putting upward pressure on the short end of the curve.  With inflation as low as it is, we do not 
need to test theories about “This time is different” with respect to yield curve inversion. The 
idea that term premiums are exceptionally low now because of QE effects is not the correct view 
if one thinks of QE as mostly working through signaling effects.  Those signaling effects would 
not exist now, so we could read longer-term yields as reflecting fundamentals with respect to 
expectations of future real growth and future inflation. 
Taking these considerations into account, I support alternative A for today.  I think we’re 
in some danger of coming off as too “hawkish” at this meeting.  Alternative A is not really all 
that dovish.  It is just a restatement of alternative B in a little softer language.  However, in my 
opinion, it would provide more optionality for the Committee as we head into the second half of 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
104 of 185
2018. In particular, the phrase “appropriate monetary policy accommodation” is more nuanced 
for the current situation and will get markets to focus on economic developments more directly 
than on Committee promises. And, just to remind everybody:  We have the SEP median in any 
event, if you want to worry about forward guidance.  The phrase “appropriate monetary policy 
accommodation” could then be modified in the future when we think we’ve reached neutral, and 
we could get rid of the word “accommodation.” 
Paragraph 3 of alternative A also stresses that inflation expectations need to be re­
centered and I think this is an important complement to the idea that the Committee is now 
projecting, according to the median SEP, that inflation will slightly overshoot the Committee’s 
target for some time or over some part of the forecast horizon. Market-based inflation 
expectations dropped dramatically in 2014.  They’ve never really recovered since that time, even 
though they’ve been up somewhat recently, partly on energy prices. 
I think the changes in paragraph 4, which are the same in alternative A and alternative B, 
are appropriate and welcome.  I would now think about not having paragraph 4 at all.  If you 
look at paragraph 4 today, it actually doesn’t say much, so I think a next step might be to 
eliminate paragraph 4 entirely. 
On the issue of press conferences, I would say, “What a good idea.” I think it’ll provide 
more optionality for the Committee as we get into trickier business about making monetary 
policy decisions.  I think upcoming decisions will feel more like ordinary times—where we 
might want to go higher or we might want to go lower, depending on the particular situation or 
the way that the data come in—and I think routine press conferences will help us make those 
decisions. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
105 of 185
I also think having press conferences meets an international standard.  It allows the Chair 
to guide market expectations on a more regular basis.  In my opinion, even when not too much is 
happening, markets want confirmation that the FOMC thinks that not too much is happening.  So 
I think even in relatively dull times, it’s valuable to have regular communication with the 
markets by the Chair and not just by other members of the Committee. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support draft alternative B as written. 
Though alternatives B and C are nearly identical, I am close to the staff’s view on how the public 
will interpret the additional language in paragraph 2.  In particular, my sense is that it would be 
interpreted as a signal that the Committee is leaning toward raising the federal funds rate more 
rapidly than what is suggested in the SEP.  I think that tempting that interpretation would be a 
mistake. In that light, I do have sympathy for President Bullard’s arguments that he just gave 
regarding alternative A.  Again, I do have concerns about this Committee being perceived as 
being too “hawkish.” 
That said, with the economy running as strong as it is, I believe, as does my team, that 
our policy needs to not be accommodating and that we should get our policy position to neutral.  
At present, my guess on the neutral policy rate is in the range of 2.25 to 3 percent.  After the move 
today, we will be very close to the bottom of that range. 
Depending on how growth and inflation data play out in the coming months, I think it’s 
at least as likely that we will proceed slower than what is in the dot plots as it is that we will raise 
more rapidly.  My current thinking is that real rates will rise as the expansion continues on and 
that the upper part of the estimated neutral range is our most likely stopping point. But, as I 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
June 12–13, 2018
106 of 185
noted yesterday, the question of where we stop gets very interesting if longer-term rates stall near 
where they are now.  Exactly how flat can the Treasury yield structure be before we are tempting 
fate? 
My staff and I have carefully been following the research done on this issue, especially 
the work by the staffs of the Reserve Banks and the Board, and we have done some extensions 
and updates of that work on our own.  For now, I feel comfortable with the conclusion that low 
term premiums justify a flatter maturity structure than has been the historical norm, and that a 
flattening associated solely with falling term premiums is not an indicator of looming economic 
weakness. 
But that observation begs the question of just how far the federal funds rate can go before 
it is too far. My staff has noted the same relationship between recessions and near-term Treasury 
spreads discussed in the Financial Market Developments section of the Tealbook.  The causal 
interpretation of that relationship can, of course, be debated and was yesterday, and it is possible 
that if causation runs from our decisions to real outcomes, the damage is done by the time the 
market signals arrive. 
These issues feel more and more relevant as we approach the neutral-zone policy rates.  
Without data suggesting we are highly likely to be “falling behind the curve” on our inflation 
objective, proceeding cautiously is feeling like the comfortable course for me.  At the very least, 
I think we should, for now, avoid signaling too much precision or certainty about where we are 
headed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support a 25 basis point increase in the funds 
rate at this meeting.  Inflation has been moving toward our target, and the unemployment rate is 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
107 of 185
very likely below its natural rate. However, I have just one suggestion.  The paragraph 2 
language in alternative B concerns me somewhat.  I realize it’s not intended to convey the 
message that 2 percent is an upper bound or slightly leaky upper bound on inflation.  But I think 
the language would benefit from being more explicit about the symmetric nature of our inflation 
objective—for example, something along the lines of “The Committee expects that further 
gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained 
expansion of economic activity and strong labor market conditions, and inflation may move 
modestly above 2 percent for a time before moving in line with the Committee’s symmetric 2 
percent objective.” This is a relatively small change that does, in my view, one important thing. 
It places additional emphasis on the fact that the Committee is willing to accept a modest 
overshoot of inflation with respect to our 2 percent objective. Inflation has consistently been 
below our objective for an inordinate period of time, and it would be useful to underscore that 
the Committee is as comfortable with modest overshoots as it is with modest undershoots.  I 
worry that the proposed language will be interpreted as an overly strong signal of two additional 
rate hikes over the course of this year. 
On another matter, I would like to reiterate some concerns that I raised at our previous 
meeting.  They pertain to how long we can maintain IOER as a ceiling for the federal funds rate.  
As the balance sheet continues to normalize, a greater fraction of funds market trades will be 
between banks, and it will be increasingly difficult to maintain IOER as a ceiling.  Further 
reductions in the IOER relative to the top of the Committee’s funds rate target range will imply 
that banks will offer Federal Home Loan Banks relatively lower rates, because there will be less 
surplus to split. Thus, the incentive for arbitrage trades will be reduced, and an already thin 
market could disappear. As a Committee, we may have to face this environment in the not-too­


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
108 of 185
distant future, and I think it would be prudent to prepare some options for that eventuality.  
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written. On the 
basis of my current assessment of economic conditions and the forecasts of my team, I do 
believe it’s appropriate for us to continue the process of removing accommodation at this 
meeting. 
I believe we should be gradually moving toward a neutral policy rate.  I’m cognizant of 
the risk that the longer that we maintain growth above potential, the more difficult it may be to 
achieve a soft landing. On the other hand, in the medium and longer term, I continue to be very 
concerned about eroding demographic trends leading to sluggish workforce growth, education 
and skill levels that are not keeping up with business needs and are contributing to sluggish 
productivity growth, and the likely unsustainable path of U.S. government debt to GDP. 
With that in mind, I’ll be closely monitoring economic developments and updating our 
assessments for 2019 and 2020.  This will help inform my views on the appropriate overall pace 
of increases in the federal funds rate. 
As I do this, though, and as we approach neutral, there are some points that I will be 
thinking about.  First, I’m cognizant of the fact that, for me, neutral would mean, after today, 
three more moves and would occur probably sometime in the spring of 2019 and certainly in the 
first half of 2019. The first question I’ll be thinking about and debating with my team and others 
around this table is whether the recent fiscal stimulus masking the effect of tightening by the 
Committee?  As the fiscal effect fades and the lagged effects of our removal of accommodation 
take hold, what will be the effect on economic conditions?  Once we get to neutral, do we risk 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
109 of 185
overdoing it and realizing it too late?  And with all of that in mind, I’m cognizant of the fact that 
monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. 
The second point is that I’m also cognizant of the fact that our tools are asymmetrical. 
And, in particular—especially in light of recent fiscal actions—I ask the question, what tools do 
we actually have in a downturn when fiscal policy appears likely to be unavailable? 
So, with those points in mind, I’m inclined to err on the side of being reluctant to move 
past neutral, once we get to that point, andto think more about going a little more slowly in the 
near term. And for me, that means more likely three rate increases in 2018, not four, although I 
remain open minded about that.  But it causes me to want to turn over a few more cards and be 
continually mindful of the risk that the Fed may overdo it and, because of the lag with which 
monetary policy acts, we will realize it too late. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as well.  The economy has 
evolved as we expected, and, as a consequence, I would advocate continuing on our gradual path 
to normalization.  I applaud the reduction of forward guidance in the statement.  It has served its 
purpose well.  As we move closer to neutral, I think we’ll value the flexibility to communicate in 
line with how the economy evolves. 
As we go forward, of course, our question will be how long we want to continue on this 
path.  I’ve struggled with the question of how we’ll actually know when we get to neutral when 
you take into account that fact that our r* estimates do vary from one another and they each have 
really significant confidence intervals.  I’ve gotten comfortable, though, with the notion that this 
gradual path is a practical path.  It gives us time and gives us latitude to observe and learn about 
the health of, and pressures on, the economy as we normalize.  And my instinct is to continue on 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
110 of 185
this path, so long as the economy looks as strong as it does now, and to be open to pausing when 
we see meaningful signs of weakening.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written. 
Increasing the policy rate at this meeting is consistent with the gradual pace of tightening that I 
think is appropriate.  All of that said, with inflation at target and few signs of imminent 
overheating, I think we can also be patient in our withdrawal of accommodation. 
I also support cutting the forward-guidance language out of paragraph 4.  It’s efficient. 
Efficiency is good for the soul.  It lowers our word count without loss of clarity.  In the near 
future, I think we’ll have to revisit the assertion that “the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative” in paragraph 3.  Each hike makes that question riper. 
I want to take just a minute to reflect on the pros and cons of characterizing the degree of 
accommodation in the statement.  On the plus side, such statements are a way to increase the 
transparency of our policy.  If we want to be clear and transparent about our strategy, it seems 
being able to communicate whether we think we are accommodative or tight is a good starting 
point.  
At the same time, I recognize that such statements are complicated by the considerable 
uncertainty regarding the value of the neutral rate.  One dimension of that uncertainty is the 
dispersion in the projected longer-run rates in the SEP currently. As I said yesterday, I’m 
relatively optimistic regarding potential GDP growth.  As a consequence, I have a higher long-
run rate than most of the Committee—maybe everyone on the Committee. 
Regarding the dots, a number of participants think that appropriate policy becomes 
restrictive next year.  With the higher long-run rate in my forecast, policy remains 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
111 of 185
accommodative for longer in my projection, notwithstanding a steeper path of policy rate 
increases than the median case. 
Somewhat more metaphysically—I don’t know—uncertainty over the structure of the 
economy, including the neutral rate, as well as the natural rate of unemployment and potential 
growth, would seem to favor discretion in policymaking.  But discretion in policymaking can 
exacerbate uncertainty in the economy.  It’s a bit of a negative feedback loop.  So, what I am 
wrestling with as I get more and more experience on the Committee is my continuing view that, 
to the degree possible, we have to be careful not to allow our uncertainty over the structure of the 
economy to lead to uncertainty over our strategy in monetary policy, just as, in my now tired 
analogy, a pilot cannot allow his uncertainty over the strength of the signal from the radio beacon 
to translate into uncertainty about the course he has laid in. 
One final comment on the symmetry of the inflation target.  For me, symmetry means 
that I am equally troubled by misses below the target as by misses above the target.  It does not 
imply to me that time below the target needs to be balanced proportionately or even a little bit by 
time above the target.  And while I might be equally troubled by being either above or below the 
target, taking into account the vagaries and volatility of inflation measurement, I have to say that 
small deviations in either direction do not trouble me very much.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The near-term 
fundamentals for growth are good, and the inflation outlook has improved, although a few 
questions do remain about whether we’re on track to sustainably achieve our symmetric 
2 percent inflation target. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
112 of 185
For some time, my views of appropriate monetary policy have focused on our need to 
bolster inflation expectations in order to reach our symmetric 2 percent objective.  The 
Committee’s emphasis on gradual increases in the funds rate has been a key element in this 
strategy, as it allows for a sustained pickup in inflation before policy becomes overly restrictive. 
A number of factors suggest this gradual approach is working.  The inflation data have 
improved.  Reports received from our contacts point to larger and more broadly spread wage and 
cost pressures, some of which are being passed through to prices.  TIPS inflation compensation 
has moved up some over the past year, and some tentative Chicago Fed model results suggest 
that the underlying inflation trend may have firmed a bit recently.  Nonetheless, the still-low 
levels of inflation expectations in household surveys and TIPS pricing remind us that our work is 
not quite done.  Policy needs to stay accommodative for a while longer.  This leads me to support 
maintaining a strategy of gradual rate increases for the foreseeable future. In my SEP 
submission, I assume today’s action and one more policy move this year, thus ending 2018 with 
the funds rate target range at 2 to 2.25 percent.  In Governor Quarles’s spirit of full transparency, 
I’m Number Eight in the SEP. 
I think the decision between three or four policy moves this year will be a close call, and 
I may well support a fourth move, to 2.25 to 2.5 percent, if inflation expectations firm more 
noticeably as we move through the year.  But regardless of that exact choice, it’s likely we will 
be nearing a neutral funds rate setting by early 2019.  I don’t think the rate decisions that get us 
to that point will prove to be difficult.  However, I do think we will need to be careful to prevent 
the public’s rate expectations from rising too quickly.  To that end, it is key that the statement 
continues to say that the Committee expects future rate increases to be gradual.  In addition, it 
might be useful for today’s statement to signal that we are not too far from neutral after this 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
113 of 185
action.  We could do that in paragraph 3 by saying that, after this increase, policy remains “only 
modestly accommodative.”  After all, as Governor Quarles said, it’s inevitable that we’re going 
to have to deal with this issue.  We could perhaps do it today. 
What about after we reach neutral?  Then the choices become much more difficult.  In 
my forecast, I envision that the momentum in the real economy and a recovery in underlying 
inflation trends will make it appropriate to push the funds rate to a modestly restrictive stance, 
but not by a great deal—perhaps just 50 basis points or so above neutral.  I would then likely 
advocate a pause in rate hikes, allowing us to assess our progress toward a soft landing.  At that 
point, we should be prepared to adjust policy in either direction, depending on this assessment. 
Now, I recognize that mentioning the term “pause” seems really strong.  And when I 
think back to certain sports lessons, when an instructor is trying to get you to do something that’s 
unusual, they ask for a lot, and they’re happy if you get just a little. So I would say that if, at this 
moment, we had more of an extended public discussion about being at neutral and what it means 
and a full assessment of where we are, that might be close enough to a pause if we were to 
continue to go through—or we might decide that we’ve actually done enough at that point and 
we need to look more carefully. 
Also, we should not worry about some modest overshooting of our 2 percent inflation 
objective.  A little overshooting would have the virtue of helping to firm inflation expectations 
symmetrically around the 2 percent target.  Indeed, if both inflation expectations and statistical 
measures of underlying inflation trends remain stubbornly low, I could see turning to the strategy 
in Tealbook alternative A, which aims to overshoot 2 percent by design in order to align inflation 
expectations with our symmetric objective. I share President Harker’s views that we should 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
114 of 185
strive to better describe our attitude toward symmetric 2 percent inflation, and I found President 
Bullard’s comments on this also useful. 
Yes, I recognize we would have to be vigilant against overshooting too much.  But our 
view that the Phillips curve is no longer accelerationist limits the upside risk to inflation even 
with an unemployment rate a little below 3.5 percent. 
In sum, I’m fine with today’s rate move.  I also suggest we change the language in 
paragraph 3 of alternative B to describe policy as “modestly accommodative.”  Looking ahead, I 
believe the gradual approach to policy normalization will remain appropriate, and I will be even 
more in a data-dependent mode regarding the exact path of our future rate moves. 
I did emphasize “gradual.”  If you did a word count, I said it five times—six, since I’ve 
added it there.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support increasing the federal funds rate target 
range by 25 basis points today, and I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B. The 
medium-run outlook warrants continued removal of accommodation, and today’s action is 
consistent with that.  The economy is already beyond maximum employment, and above-trend 
growth will push it further beyond sustainable levels.  Inflation is near our goal, and I expect it to 
remain near 2 percent over the forecast horizon. 
In this environment, we should be reducing the degree of monetary policy 
accommodation, consistent with the lessons from the past, the prescriptions of policy rules, and 
model-based estimates of optimal policy such as those provided in the Tealbook.  In this 
environment of strong growth, the short-run and medium-run neutral interest rate will be rising. 
This means that, just to maintain the current level of accommodation, the federal funds rate must 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
115 of 185
rise as well, and, to reduce the level of accommodation, the funds rate must rise more rapidly 
than the neutral rate. 
Estimates of the neutral rate are uncertain, but the gradual pace of rate increases implied 
by the median path in the SEP suggests that monetary policy will likely not be back to neutral 
until the second half of 2019—or later, if we consider accommodation coming from the balance 
sheet.  And note that it may be appropriate for the funds rate to move above its longer-run neutral 
level to ensure our policy goals are maintained. 
My policy rate path is somewhat steeper than the SEP median because I think it’ll be 
appropriate to move to neutral more quickly.  The median SEP path is flatter than that implied by 
simple policy rules, the path in the Tealbook, and the path in several private-sector forecasts. 
My concerns arise in that if we follow the SEP median path, there’s a nonnegligible risk we 
could be falling further “behind the curve.” Soft landings are very hard to achieve.  In the past, 
overheating has resulted in poor outcomes.  We should take actions to prevent this from 
happening. 
If the economy evolves as expected, I will support further rate increases later this year. 
Of course, if there’s a material change in the outlook, policy would need to respond 
appropriately.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  Taking 
steps that further normalize monetary policy is appropriate, in my view, in view of the 
Committee’s objectives for employment and inflation. 
Whether we can successfully engineer a soft landing remains to be seen, of course.  And, 
like others, I found the Tealbook box “Alternative View:  A Strong but Precarious Projection” 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
116 of 185
worth considering.  Certainly, the analysis highlights how the Committee will need to walk a fine 
line as labor market conditions continue to tighten and financial conditions become less 
accommodative. 
While most recession indicators remain low today, we will need to watch carefully for 
evidence that the expansion is running out of steam.  But we must also remain watchful for signs 
of inflationary pressures and financial imbalances.  Data dependence of our policy rate path will 
become increasingly appropriate as the expansion progresses, and, in my view, the changes to 
the language in alternative B move in this direction to support the Committee’s future policy 
decisions. 
Finally, I’d like to join with others in expressing my respect and appreciation to Vice 
Chairman Dudley for his contributions to and leadership of our work and for his friendship and 
collegiality.  Congratulations as you retire.  I wish you all the best. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I continue to 
focus on three key indicators—core PCE inflation, inflation expectations, and slack in the labor 
market.  Core PCE inflation is now close to target.  We’re not quite there yet, but I do believe 
we’re getting closer. Inflation expectations have moved up somewhat.  They remain a little bit 
low, but I think we’re getting close.  And, finally, slack in the labor market—I continue to think 
there’s still some slack in the labor market, but the headline unemployment rate falling does 
indicate that we’re moving closer to achieving our maximum-employment mandate. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
117 of 185
So, in light of this, I think it’s appropriate to move toward a neutral policy stance, which 
is why I support raising rates today. But I will go so far as to say I think, once we get to neutral, 
we should pause effectively and assess how the economy is unfolding.  And the big question 
mark is, where is neutral? I like to tease President Williams that the Laubach-Williams model is 
very helpful, but it also offers very, very wide error bars around its estimates. So, for me, this is 
why I continue to look at and think a lot about the yield curve discussion that we had yesterday. 
You know, when I look at where the long-term interest rates are today, I find them 
notable because they’re low by historical standards, we have a lot of fiscal stimulus, we have the 
balance sheet roll-off, and we’re signaling a fairly steep future path of the policy rate.  And yet 
long-term rates are still only at 3 percent.  There’s information contained in that. 
I also look, again, at the yield curve as an indicator not only of a potential recession risk, 
but to me, it’s also a feedback mechanism on where the neutral rate is. So the discussion 
yesterday of a near-term yield curve versus a long-term yield curve—the near-term yield curve 
does not feel as helpful to me because I don’t think r* moves around a lot in the short run.  If r* 
does move around a lot in the short run, so that it would show up in the near-term yield curve, 
then I find it’s not very useful as a policy guide because we’re like cats chasing a laser pointer. 
It’s always moving, and we’re always “behind the curve.” 
So, to me, r* is a slow-moving concept that’s responding to long-term changes in the 
macroeconomy.  So I think the spread between the 2-year and the10-year rates is going to give us 
feedback on where neutral is.  For example, if we continue raising rates and the long end of the 
curve moves up because inflation expectations are climbing, or real growth is taking off, that’s a 
good thing, and that’ll give us room to raise rates without flattening or inverting the yield curve. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
118 of 185
If, on the other hand, we raise rates and the long end of the curve stays pegged at 
3 percent, that tells me we’re getting close to neutral.  And then, whether it itself will trigger a 
recession or it’s correlated with a recession, we need to know going into it, with our eyes wide 
open, that we are inverting the yield curve and running the risk of ending the expansion 
ourselves. 
I went back through with my staff—I mentioned this yesterday—looking at previous 
FOMC discussions of the yield curve and term premiums.  And people made the point, “Hey, the 
term premium is low; the yield curve doesn’t count this time; this time is different.” They said 
that long-term interest rates are low, it actually signals easy financial conditions, and this could 
have a stimulative effect.  So we should know if we’re making these exact same arguments that 
previous Committees made before we went into recessions.  I just want us to know that. 
So the big question is where neutral is, and I think the yield curve is going to be a good 
indicator. 
Last point.  There’s increasing chatter in the public sphere about a recession in the 
pipeline.  A recent Wall Street Journal economists’ survey said that 59 percent of the surveyed 
economists said that 2020 was the most likely date for the expansion to end, and 62 percent of 
them said the Fed tightening was the most likely cause of that.  So, again, I just think we should 
go in with eyes wide open and make decisions, recognizing the balance of risks.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  It will be challenging to calibrate monetary policy to 
sustain full employment and re-anchor trend inflation around 2 percent, while adjusting to 
sizable temporary stimulus at a time when resource utilization is high. I continue to view 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
119 of 185
gradual increases in the federal funds rate as the appropriate path, although I will remain vigilant 
for the emergence of risks. 
We’ve seen a roughly 50 basis point increase in longer-term Treasury yields, on net, 
since the beginning of the year.  Even with this increase, the spread between the 10-year and 
3-month Treasury yields has declined from about 375 basis points in early 2010 to about 
125 basis points currently.  Like many of you, I’m attentive to the possibility of inversion of the 
yield curve.  Historically, such inversions have had a reliable track record of predicting 
recessions in the United States, with one false negative and one false positive in five decades. 
To put those numbers in perspective, the current spread is about 20 basis points narrower 
than the average over the 45 years before the financial crisis.  Furthermore, it’s helpful to take 
into account the very low level of the current 10-year yield by historical standards, which, 
around 3 percent, is well below the average of 6.25 percent during the 20 years before the crisis. 
Of course, one important reason the 10-year Treasury yield may be unusually low is that market 
expectations of interest rates in the longer run may be unusually low.  But a second reason may 
be that the term premium has fallen to levels that are very low by historical standards. 
According to various estimates, the term premium has tended to be slightly negative in recent 
years. 
By contrast, when the spread between the 10-year and 3-month yields was at its peak of 
325 basis points in early 2010, the measure of the term premium was close to 100 basis points.  
With the term premium today very low by historical standards, this may temper somewhat the 
conclusions that we can draw from a historical pattern seen in periods with a higher term 
premium. With a very low term premium, any given amount of monetary policy tightening will 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
120 of 185
lead to an inversion sooner, so that even a modest tightening that might not have led to an 
inversion in the past could do so today. 
One possible contributor to the low level of the term premium may be the asset purchases 
of the Federal Reserve and other central banks.  In fact, a number of studies suggest these 
policies have been successful in lowering the term premium, which was, of course, a stated goal 
of our asset purchase programs. Another reason the term premium may be lower than in the past 
is the change in correlation between stock and bond returns, likely associated with changes in 
expected inflation outcomes.  Although in the ’70s and ’80s these returns tended to be positively 
correlated, more recently, the correlation has tended to be negative.  This corresponds to an 
increased demand for long-dated bonds as an instrument for hedging portfolio risks.  It’s an open 
question whether that correlation is likely to remain as negative as it has been recently, due to 
better-anchored inflation expectations following a long period of low and stable inflation, or 
whether the correlation will diminish as we move further away from the effective lower bound. 
If those two factors are taken into account, it seems likely the term premium will increase 
somewhat, although perhaps not to the high levels seen historically.  The continued gradual 
runoff of the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve—and, ultimately, reduced bond buying by 
other central banks—is estimated to put upward pressure on the term premium, while this may be 
counterbalanced in part by diminished expectations of high-inflation outcomes. 
In the median outlook in the SEP, the federal funds rate is projected to reach its longer-
run value by 2019 and exceed it in 2020.  If the 10-year term premium were to stay at current 
levels, that would, in fact, imply a yield curve inversion.  But if the term premium rises as the 
balance sheet runs off along the lines we’ve seen in staff estimates, the effect may be to forestall 
an inversion of the long-dated yield curve. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
121 of 185
It’s important to keep in mind that the flattening yield curve suggested by the SEP 
median is associated with a policy rate path calibrated to sustain full employment and inflation 
around target.  So I will, like many of you, keep a close watch on the yield curve as an important 
signal on how tight financial conditions are becoming.  But yield curve movements will need to 
be interpreted, in the words of President Barkin yesterday, holistically, within the broader 
context of financial conditions and the outlook, and will be one of several considerations in 
forming my assessment of appropriate policy. 
Related to that movement in the SEP median path, I support the proposed change, 
embedded in alternative B, that would remove the forward-guidance language that was 
introduced a few years ago.  That language has passed its sell-by date and no longer provides 
accurate information regarding the Committee’s policy reaction function. 
I would also hope that, in the not-too-distant future, we revisit the second sentence of 
paragraph 3.  When the unemployment rate was well above its longer-run value and inflation was 
below its target, it was appropriate to signal that policy was accommodative.  As we transition 
from headwinds to tailwinds, the appropriate benchmark for judging whether policy is 
accommodative, and how accommodative, will become increasingly murky, as I think the 
discussion around this table has revealed.  It could be confusing to have to decide each meeting 
whether to describe policy as slightly or modestly accommodative, neutral, or modestly 
restrictive, for instance. This in turn would require clarifying whether our benchmark for this is 
the short-run neutral rate, which is how I think about it but which is not reported in the SEP, or 
the long-run rate, which is in the SEP and, I think, would be a natural thing for others to think 
about.  Instead, I would suggest that we drop this sentence altogether or modify it to indicate that 
we judge monetary policy to be appropriate to sustain our dual-mandate objectives. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
122 of 185
In an environment of tightening resource utilization and above-trend growth, the sizable 
fiscal stimulus in the pipeline looks likely to provide a boost to demand in the near-to-medium 
term that should fade somewhat further out. On balance, I believe this outlook is consistent with 
a gradual pace of increases similar to that in the SEP median.  That path may well take the 
federal funds rate over the medium run above our assessment of its longer-run value.  But if so, 
the main reason would be the temporary fiscal stimulus, which is likely to boost the neutral rate 
gradually over the medium term but leave little imprint on the longer-run neutral rate. A 
continued gradual pace is warranted as well in light of the long period of undershooting the 
inflation target in order to achieve a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. 
Finally, in light of recent developments in money markets, I think it would be prudent to 
clarify the long-term operating framework for our balance sheet sooner rather than later.  Recent 
developments in money markets could reflect a variety of factors, including expected changes in 
the supply of Treasury bills and changes in the demand for reserves associated with post-crisis 
regulations or liquidity risk-management practices. 
As Lorie discussed yesterday, it is hard to disentangle these different forces, so our 
understanding of the demand for reserves is likely to remain imperfect.  If, as I prefer, the 
Committee decides to retain a floor system, we may find that we may reach the desired level of 
reserves sooner rather than later, which would have implications for the duration of our balance 
sheet runoff plans. 
But this, of course, is an issue for another day.  For today, I support alternative B.  Thank 
you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Williams. 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
123 of 185
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written. And if 
I followed Governor Quarles’s comment that efficiency is good for the soul, I might just stop 
there.  Alas, I won’t.  [Laughter] 
Recent data continue to indicate above-trend real GDP growth and exceptionally tight 
labor markets.  Inflation is also within a whisker of our target, and with the labor markets that are 
strong and expected to tighten further, we should achieve our inflation objective on a sustained 
basis within a year. 
These conditions warrant continuing a steady but gradual removal of policy 
accommodation by raising the target range for the federal funds rate today.  Raising rates today 
is appropriate, in light of the progress we’ve already made on our dual-mandate goals and the 
very positive outlook. 
I continue to expect a total of four rate increases for this year.  Language in today’s 
statement nicely captures the improvement in economic conditions and the progress we’ve made 
in removing policy accommodation. In particular, the removal of references to separate market-
and survey-based indicators of longer-term inflation expectations in paragraph 1 appropriately 
reflects the fact that these measures are now largely in alignment, so such specificity is no longer 
called for. 
Also, the forward-guidance language at the bottom of paragraph 4—namely, that “the 
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in 
the longer run”—has grown stale, as a number of people have said.  This sentence served us well 
near the effective lower bound, but with a strong economy and policy normalization well under 
way, its expiration date has arrived. Furthermore, the straightforward forward guidance in 
paragraph 2 adequately conveys our current expectations for the federal funds rate path. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
124 of 185
These changes in the statement reflect the progress we’ve made in achieving our goals 
and in no way suggest a shift in our policy approach or our view of the likely future path of 
policy.  And this message, I think, is particularly important to reinforce in our public 
communications. 
In terms of the second sentence of paragraph 3 that President Evans, Governor Brainard, 
and others commented on, I do agree that this issue of describing policy as accommodative will 
become more problematic.  I do have a very low view of the neutral rate, so I’m comfortable 
with keeping that language in now.  But I do think that it’s going to take quite a bit of discussion 
in this room, specifically about what do we even mean by this sentence? How do we think about 
the interplay of our short-term interest rate policy instrument and our balance sheet policy?  And, 
getting back to the point that Governor Brainard made, when you think about “accommodative,” 
how do you think of this, versus other factors that are influencing the economic outlook, like 
fiscal policy or other tailwinds?  That, I think, kind of gets at the short-run/longer-run view of r*. 
So I do think that we need to have a serious conversation about how this language should 
evolve and when that should happen.  I think we’re going to have to also have that serious 
conversation about, how do we understand that? And what purpose will this sentence really 
serve as we get closer to neutral, whatever that is, and we’re really in, I think, more of a data-
dependent kind of position in terms of the stance of policy?  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support alternative B as written. [Pause.] 
[Laughter] 
PRESIDENT WILLIAMS.  Who knew? 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
125 of 185
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The case for continuing to remove monetary policy 
accommodation gradually, I think, remains very compelling, as I said yesterday. 
As this is my final FOMC meeting—number 92, as the Chair mentioned yesterday—I 
thought I’d put in my two cents on some of the longer-term issues that the FOMC will be 
wrestling with over the next few years.  You should take this as evidence that it’s going to be 
hard for me to let go and step down from the FOMC.  As I noted last evening, even though we’re 
at a good spot in the economic cycle, there remains lots of cool stuff to work on, so I wish I 
could work on it here. 
There are three areas that I want to touch on briefly.  First, I think it’s important not to get 
overly invested in the r* concept.  Not only is r* unobservable, but it’s likely to move around 
over time. After all, the rate we really care about is the short-term real rate that applies today 
that’s neutral, not some time far out in the future.  And that’s influenced not just by long-term 
factors like the productivity trend and demographics, but also by shorter-term ones, including the 
evolution of financial conditions, the impulse coming from fiscal policy, and the momentum of 
economic growth abroad.  For example, all else being equal, if animal spirits suddenly become 
more exuberant, causing financial conditions to ease, this should necessitate a somewhat higher 
short-term interest rate path and vice versa. 
Thus, I hope the Committee will not put too much emphasis on another unobserved 
variable.  We already have the natural rate of unemployment, potential GDP, and the GDP gap, 
which we use in our discussions of monetary policy.  I wonder if outsiders might view this 
musing about a bunch of unobserved variables as a bit daft.  [Laughter] 
You know, I would judge where neutral is as, it’s not just on the basis of an estimate of 
r*—I mean, I think r* is an interesting starting point—but also by looking carefully, as John 


 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
126 of 185
noted, to the data.  What are we actually observing?  How are things that we observe changing 
the economic outlook? So, not being too mechanical about what r* is in terms of guiding the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
The second thing I want to talk about is one of my favorite subjects.  I very much hope 
that the Committee retains the current floor-type system.  Not only is such a regime much less 
complex operationally for the Desk than a corridor system, but I also think it has other really 
important advantages that are not really widely acknowledged.  The most important is that, 
relative to a corridor system, it allows us to provide better support in maintaining financial 
stability. 
One disadvantage of a corridor-type system is that it can actually constrain the Fed’s 
ability to provide the type of open-ended lender-of-last-resort backstops that can help support 
financial stability. With a corridor system, the reserve adds from draws on the lender-of-last­
resort facilities have to be offset by reserve drains in order to keep the amount of the reserves in 
the banking system at a sufficiently low level to maintain control of the federal funds rate.  This 
tends to make facilities that are either large, or open ended, unattractive.  I think this is one 
reason why the initial sizes of the term auction facility that we introduced in early 2008 were 
relatively small. 
Perhaps an even better example is the Term Securities Lending Facility, which we 
introduced in March 2008.  It was chosen in large part precisely because it did not add bank 
reserves to the system. If you remember, in the TSLF, we swapped Treasury collateral for less-
liquid collateral, and there was no reserve effect.  The primary dealer credit facility only came 
later, after Bear Stearns got in trouble and was merged with J.P. Morgan. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
127 of 185
As a central banker, I wouldn’t want to feel constrained in my ability to introduce broad 
and credible lender-of-last-resort facilities.  Private-sector participants are more likely to 
continue to engage with their counterparties—that is, borrow and lend—when they know a 
central bank backstop can be drawn on, if economic and financial conditions were to deteriorate. 
Such facilities are much more feasible in a floor system because there’s no conflict between the 
goals of liquidity provision and maintaining control of short-term interest rates. 
The third issue I want to talk about is the open question of whether the FOMC should 
change its strategic framework in order to mitigate the risk of a return to the effective lower 
bound on short-term interest rates.  Now, some have proposed addressing this by raising the 
Federal Reserve’s inflation objective.  And I understand the reasons for that.  But I’m not 
supportive of this for several reasons.  Most important, I don’t think that a higher inflation target 
would be viewed as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s congressional mandate to pursue price 
stability.  I think we’ve sort of gotten away with 2 percent.  But I think if we push it higher, the 
Congress would start to balk at that. 
Moreover, there may be better ways of reducing zero-lower-bound risks than raising the 
inflation target.  For example, emphasizing the fact that we now have tools, such as forward 
guidance and large-scale asset purchases, that we would be prepared to use should circumstances 
warrant their deployment, would help keep inflation expectations better anchored. 
A simple alternative might just be to emphasize that we want inflation to average around 
2 percent over the medium term.  In other words, undershoots of our inflation objective would be 
offset by overshoots.  This would be a move away from our current “bygones” policy, in which 
we do not attempt to offset misses but, instead, always try to push inflation back to precisely 
2 percent.  If we move to such a regime, this presumably would help keep inflation expectations 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
128 of 185
more firmly anchored.  This relatively subtle shift in how we talk about inflation might achieve 
most of the benefits of an explicit price-level targeting regime while avoiding the complexity and 
the challenges in communication that would surely follow if we adopted a PLT regime explicitly. 
You know, I think Chairman Bernanke’s suggestion of an asymmetric PLT regime is 
conceptually attractive, but I think it might be difficult to communicate effectively in practice. 
In contrast, an inflation regime that aims for 2 percent average inflation over time should be easy 
to communicate.  In fact, we’re probably already close to being there with our emphasis that the 
inflation target is symmetric.  We’ve already sort of moved a little bit in that direction. 
Finally, I want to thank everybody for last night’s reception and all of the nice comments 
from Chair Powell and President Rosengren.  I want to put a little bit of what I said last evening 
on the record.  I mean, it’ll take 5.5 years for the record to come out, but I still want it to be there. 
[Laughter] First of all, I want to thank everybody for being such good colleagues.  It’s really 
been a pleasure for me to participate in all of these meetings over the past 11.5 years and have 
the opportunity to collaborate with every one of you.  I’m so impressed with the commitment of 
everybody associated with the Fed to our mission. 
Second, I’m confident that you’ll continue to do what will need to be done in the years 
ahead, whether that’s adjusting monetary policy to keep the economy on an even keel or 
responding to the next inevitable—hopefully much smaller—financial crisis. Most important in 
my mind is the need to maintain the courage of your convictions; to try to anticipate rather than 
react; to make choices affirmatively when needed—which means acting rather than waiting; and 
to be willing, regardless of the short-term political consequences, to do what’s in the nation’s 
long-term interest.  Because I know you will all strive to do this, I’ll rest easy.  Monetary policy 
is in excellent hands.  Some of the players change, but the chain itself remains unbroken. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 12–13, 2018
129 of 185
I’m very pleased that John will be moving around the table at the next FOMC meeting 
and will be taking over the reins at the New York Fed on Monday morning.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you, Bill.  And thanks to everyone for the discussion.  I 
heard quite broad support for alternative B—more specifically, for a 25 basis point increase in 
the target range for the federal funds rate. 
President Harker, you mentioned an attraction to the language on the overshooting in 
alternative A.  You also mentioned support for alternative B.  I didn’t take you as proposing that 
language for consideration at this meeting. 
MR. HARKER.  No, not necessarily—right. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  Then I understood correctly.  Thank you. 
I’d also like to remind everyone that I’m going to be announcing at the press conference 
today that we’ll be moving to having regular press conferences after every meeting, beginning 
with next January’s meeting.  The delayed effective date is to make the point that this is about 
better communication and transparency and that there’s no message about the path of policy 
here.  Notwithstanding that, the announcement could easily be market sensitive, so please do 
remember that it’s not publicly known until we start at 2:30. 
Let me now ask Jim Clouse to make clear what we’re voting on and to read the roll. 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you.  The vote will be on the monetary policy statement as it 
appears on page 4 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials.  The vote will also encompass the 
directive to the Desk as it appears in the implementation note shown on pages 8 and 9 of 
Thomas’s briefing materials. 
Chairman Powell 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
President Barkin 
Yes 
President Bostic 
Yes 


 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Mester 
Yes 
Governor Quarles 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
June 12–13, 2018
130 of 185
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Now we’ve got two sets of related matters under 
the Board’s jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  As we’ve 
discussed, the proposal is to set the rates paid on required and excess reserves at a level 5 basis 
points below the upper end of the target range for the federal funds rate.  This should encourage 
trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the target range. I first need a motion 
from a Board member to increase the interest rates paid on required and excess reserve balances. 
Specifically, the interest rates paid on required and excess reserves would be set at 1.95 percent, 
effective June 14, 2018.  Do I have a motion? 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  And a second? 
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Finally, I need a motion from a Board 
member to approve establishment of the primary credit rate by the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas 
City, Dallas, and San Francisco at 2.5 percent, effective June 14, 2018.  It will also encompass 
approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2.5 percent primary credit rate by 
the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective on the later of June 14, 2018, and the date such 
Reserve Bank informs the Secretary of the Board of such a request. The Secretary of the Board 
would be authorized to inform such Reserve Bank of the approval of the Board of Governors on 
such notification by the Reserve Bank.  Lastly, this vote will also encompass establishment of 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
June 12–13, 2018
131 of 185
the rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s 
June 8 memo to the Board.  I need a motion. 
MS. BRAINARD.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 
MR. QUARLES.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Item 4, “Election of John C. Williams as 
Vice Chairman, Effective June 18, 2018.” By tradition, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York’s president is elected by the Committee, and our next item will be that election, effective 
on June 18.  And I think Bill Dudley has a nomination. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d like to nominate John Williams to be the Vice Chair 
of the FOMC, effective June 18. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Any other nominations? [No response] All in 
favor of electing John Williams as Vice Chairman of the FOMC, effective June 18?  [Chorus of 
ayes]  Any opposed?  [No response] Congratulations, John, on your upcoming new roles.  We 
look forward to working with you in these roles. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  So thank you.  Finally, just to confirm that the next meeting is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, July 31 and August 1, 2018.  We’ve got lunch next door.  We’ve got 
TV at 2:30.  [Laughter] So thanks, everyone.  See you soon. 
END OF MEETING 
