SOURCE: FOMC20190731meeting.pdf
DATE: 20190731
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 
July 30–31, 2019 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in 
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on 
Tuesday, July 30, 2019, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 31, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.  
PRESENT:  
Jerome H. Powell, Chair 
John C. Williams, Vice Chair 
Michelle W. Bowman 
Lael Brainard 
James Bullard 
Richard H. Clarida 
Charles L. Evans 
Esther L. George 
Randal K. Quarles 
Eric Rosengren 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
Stacey Tevlin, Economist 
Rochelle M. Edge, Beverly Hirtle, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Anne 
Wilson, Associate Economists 
Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback,1 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
1 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and outlook. 
July 30-31, 2019
1 of 329


 
 
 
Eric Belsky,2 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, 
Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
 
Margie Shanks,4 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
Arthur Lindo, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; 
Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Brian M. Doyle,5 Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, 
Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Don Kim, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors; S. Wayne Passmore, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, 
Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 
 
Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Andrea Raffo, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve 
Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors 
 
Etienne Gagnon, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
 
2 Attended the discussion of the review of monetary policy framework. 
3 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations.  
4 Attended the discussion of economic developments and outlook through discussion of monetary policy. 
5 Attended Tuesday session only. 
July 30-31, 2019
2 of 329


 
 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Alyssa G. Anderson, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Dario Caldara2 and Albert Queralto,2 Principal Economists, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Isabel Cairó,2 Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 
 
Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
 
David Altig, Michael Dotsey, and Jeffrey Fuhrer, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Boston, respectively 
 
Marc Giannoni,2 Spencer Krane, and Paula Tkac,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively  
 
Robert G. Valletta, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
 
Terry Fitzgerald, Christopher J. Neely,2 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Minneapolis, St. Louis, and New York, respectively  
 
Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
 
Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
Joseph G. Haubrich, Senior Economic and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland 
 
Brent Bundick, Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
 
Vasco Curdia,2 Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
 
 
 
 
July 30-31, 2019
3 of 329


 
 
 
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
July 30–31, 2019 
 
July 30 Session 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Good morning, everyone. 
PARTICIPANTS.  Good morning. 
CHAIR POWELL.  This meeting, as usual, will be a joint meeting of the FOMC and the 
Board.  I need a motion from a Board member to close the meeting. 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  Our first agenda item is the initial installment on 
our strategic review of the monetary policy framework. 
Before we jump into this, let me say that I am very pleased—even excited—that the 
review has now reached this phase of deliberations within the Committee.  I think the very fact 
of the review and the design of the review have been very well received by the constituencies we 
serve, by our elected oversight committees, and by the central banking community around the 
world.  Many others are considering following our lead on this.  I think the conception and the 
execution so far have been flawless.  The Fed Listens events have really worked, and the 
branding is just exceptional. 
And now these issues come before the Committee, so I very much look forward to this 
phase of the process.  I think it has already been a big gain for process transparency and 
accountability, and I am hopeful that the substantive considerations and decisions and 
communications that come out of the review will also put us in a better place relative to our 
mandate and those we serve.  And, with that, let’s get started with the staff briefings from Marc, 
Etienne, and Vasco.  Marc, would you like to begin? 
July 30-31, 2019
4 of 329


 
 
 
MR. GIANNONI.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the handout 
labeled “Material for Briefing on Review of Monetary Policy Framework.”  Today’s 
discussion begins your internal deliberation of the Fed’s monetary policy 
framework—that is, the goals, tools, strategies, and communication employed by the 
FOMC to achieve its congressionally mandated goals.  Before giving the floor to 
Etienne Gagnon and Vasco Curdia for their summaries of the two staff memos that 
we sent you, I would like to highlight a few general issues regarding the staff’s work 
in support of your review and provide a brief roadmap. 
Because the current framework has evolved significantly in recent years, it may 
be helpful to define what lies within the current framework and what options might 
lie outside it.  During this review, we will use a working definition of the current 
framework that is summarized on the first slide.  According to this definition, the 
framework includes everything articulated in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy as well as the use of tools that have already been employed 
by the Committee—namely, conventional interest rate policy, forward guidance, and 
balance sheet policies.  In addition, we interpret the consensus statement as implying 
a let “bygones be bygones” approach, in which the history of inflation does not affect 
the current setting of monetary policy.  In our reading of history, the Committee to 
date has not communicated or acted as if a commitment to offsetting past inflation 
misses was part of its framework.  We recognize that the Committee hasn’t agreed on 
this definition of its current framework.  But, for clarity of the work that the staff will 
be presenting at this and coming meetings, we thought that we had to pick a 
definition. 
The key features of the consensus statement are summarized in slide 2.  That 
document reiterates the elements of the dual mandate, specifies an explicit numerical 
inflation objective, and provides a corresponding numerical estimate related to the 
employment leg of the mandate.  It also emphasizes the Committee’s concern about 
deviations of inflation on either side of the target value and articulates the balanced 
approach in addressing deviations of employment and inflation from their goals.  In 
addition, it acknowledges the importance of the balance of risks, including risks to the 
financial system. 
As noted in the bottom of slide 2, the consensus statement does not mention how 
the framework operates in the vicinity of the effective lower bound, nor whether 
anchored inflation expectations are necessary conditions for price stability, and it 
does not endorse a strategy that would aim for 2 percent inflation, on average, or 
“over the cycle.”  These aspects of the consensus statement will presumably be at the 
heart of your discussions in coming months. 
A number of ongoing developments in macroeconomic structure have arguably 
stressed the current framework and raise the question of whether the current 
framework will serve the Committee well in addressing future downturns.  These 
environmental features, which are summarized in slide 3, include a low and uncertain 
 
1 The materials used by Messrs. Giannoni, Gagnon, and Curdia are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
July 30-31, 2019
5 of 329


 
 
 
neutral real rate of interest, or r*—which likely implies a higher likelihood of hitting 
the effective lower bound; persistently lower realized inflation that may lead to a 
slippage of long-run expectations below 2 percent—which may, in turn, slow the 
return of inflation to target; and changes in the inflation process due, for instance, to 
changing and eternally uncertain natural rate of unemployment or u*, a decline in the 
responsiveness of inflation to real activity, or other factors leading to persistently 
lower inflation. 
In support of your discussions over the next several meetings, staff memos will 
entertain two types of alterations to policy, as shown in slide 4.  The first is to use 
your tools differently, but still within the guardrails implied by the current 
framework, benefiting from what you have learned about the efficacy of these tools 
and the costs associated with using them.  The second set of alterations would entail a 
change in the framework.  During the course of this framework review, the staff work 
will explore strategies that take the 2 percent inflation goal as given but, in some 
circumstances, intentionally move inflation away from the 2 percent goal—a key 
feature of “makeup” policies. 
Slide 5 summarizes the areas that the staff memos will explore.  The first memo, 
which Etienne will summarize, is designed to draw the lessons from the post–Great 
Recession period about the efficacy and costs arising from use of your tools as well as 
discussing whether the current framework imposes any limitations on the use of these 
tools.  The second memo, summarized by Vasco, focuses on the policy challenges 
and tradeoffs posed by the structural changes noted earlier.  The next set of memos, to 
be presented in September, will introduce two fundamental questions.  First:  As we 
look forward, in light of the challenging structural changes already noted, is the 
current framework likely to be effective in confronting the challenges of making 
sustained progress toward the 2 percent inflation goal and responding to potential 
ELB episodes?  Second, how do some widely discussed alternatives to the current 
framework work, and how might they help overcome these structural and 
environmental changes?  Throughout the memos, robustness to alternative 
assumptions about economic behavior is a major theme. 
Beyond September, the staff currently plan to present an analysis of the 
distributional consequences of monetary policy, a theme that has emerged as a focal 
point in the Fed Listens efforts.  Following the discussion of strategies, the staff will 
also prepare memos considering ways to evolve the use of its tools in a future 
downturn, including the choice between date-based and state-based forward guidance, 
the use of negative interest rates, as well as alternative approaches to balance sheet 
policies, focusing especially on quantity-target versus rate-target balance sheet 
policies.  The essential point with respect to the later memos is that it is the intention 
of the steering group to confer with the Committee throughout the process to ensure 
that the material put before you is on point with respect to the questions and issues 
that you deem most relevant.  I will now hand it off to Etienne. 
MR. GAGNON.  Thanks, Marc.  The decade since the financial crisis has been a 
period of dramatic changes in the conduct of monetary policy, here and abroad, in 
July 30-31, 2019
6 of 329


 
 
 
response to unprecedented challenges.  As you begin your deliberations about the 
monetary policy framework, it seems natural to ask what lessons the experience of the 
past decade may hold that are relevant in potentially revising your framework.  The 
two memos that Vasco and I will summarize are, in different ways, directed at this 
goal. 
The materials for the memo “Monetary Policy and Economic Performance since 
the Financial Crisis” start on slide 6.  The memo first reviews macroeconomic 
outcomes from the crisis onward, a period that saw significant deviations from 
mandated goals.  Starting with maximum employment, slide 6 shows that the crisis 
boosted the unemployment rate (the black line) to 10 percent, well above the range of 
estimates of its longer-run normal level in the SEP at the time (the blue area).  
Despite impaired policy transmission channels, the unemployment rate fell more 
rapidly than following the recessions of the early 1990s and 2000s, though not as 
rapidly as during the 1980s.  Regarding price stability, slide 7 shows that headline and 
core PCE inflation sank during the crisis.  Inflation has run modestly below 2 percent 
for most of the time since the FOMC formalized 2 percent as its longer-run goal in 
2012, even as the unemployment rate has fallen to a near 50-year low. 
One concern is that repeated undershooting of the inflation goal could erode 
households’ and businesses’ longer-run inflation expectations.  Slide 8 shows that 
some measures, such as TIPS compensation (the black line) and median Michigan 
expectations (the red line), have weakened in recent years.  Other measures, such as 
the median PCE inflation estimate in the SPF (the blue line), remain near pre-crisis 
levels.  Whether longer-run inflation expectations are consistent, on balance, with 
sustained achievement of the 2 percent goal is debatable.  We have seen in other 
economies that slippage of longer-term inflation expectations can reduce already 
limited policy space even further and severely constrain central banks’ ability to 
provide necessary accommodation. 
Several aspects of the U.S. economic performance surprised policymakers and 
market participants.  Most expected stronger economic activity and a faster return of 
inflation to 2 percent than was realized.  Most also underestimated the speed and 
extent of the fall in unemployment.  And, as slide 9 shows, policymakers and market 
participants repeatedly postponed the expected date of liftoff from the ELB.  Our 
memo traces these surprises in part to the structural transformations that Marc 
described and that Vasco will discuss further, which were difficult to discern in real 
time and whose evolution remains uncertain. 
As Marc also noted, the policy framework also changed this past decade.  
Notably, the Committee deployed balance sheet policies and forward guidance on 
unprecedented scales and with limited knowledge of their benefits and costs.  A 
majority of observers view these tools as having eased financial conditions, supported 
employment and inflation, and made up for some, though not all, of the shortfall in 
policy accommodation that would otherwise have been brought about by the ELB.  
Some had expressed fears that asset purchases would trigger an inflation outburst, 
July 30-31, 2019
7 of 329


 
 
 
induce excessive risk-taking, or disrupt market functioning.  These worries did not 
become reality. 
We believe that the FOMC could have pursued even more accommodative 
policies at the ELB under the current framework, had it deemed it appropriate.  
Before 2015, slack was abundant and most participants saw inflation below 2 percent 
over the medium term under appropriate policy.  In this context, more forceful 
policies need not have led to an overshoot of the inflation goal and thus could have 
been consistent with the current framework.  Model simulations suggest that greater 
policy accommodation early in the recovery would have been beneficial. 
In particular, the foreign experience suggests that the Federal Reserve could have 
conducted even larger asset purchases.  As slide 10 shows, the Federal Reserve 
boosted its balance sheet less, as a fraction of GDP, than did the ECB, the Bank of 
England, and especially the Bank of Japan.  That said, because the short-run Phillips 
curve is flat, the FOMC would have needed to expand the balance sheet considerably 
to raise inflation even modestly, possibly complicating the eventual reduction of the 
balance sheet.  In addition, some evidence suggests that, though beneficial, the 
macroeconomic effects of LSAPs abroad may have been smaller for more recent than 
earlier programs. 
With respect to forward guidance, we note that the Committee made only 
moderate use of this tool for most of the period.  Consequently, we see the FOMC’s 
ability to use forward guidance to engineer a substantial easing of financial conditions 
as largely untested. 
Slide 11 summarizes our memo’s mixed conclusions about economic 
performance and monetary policy under the current framework.  To some extent, the 
outcomes of the past decade reflect the challenges of conducting monetary policy in a 
changing economy using untested tools, rather than the shortcomings of the 
framework.  We have learned that the Committee had space to do more.  And so it 
could act more forcefully in the future, even under the current framework.  A key 
concern is that inflation has run modestly below 2 percent for many years, and that 
some measures of longer-run inflation expectations are low.  Thus, an important 
unresolved issue facing the Committee is whether it can, under the current 
framework, keep these expectations anchored at levels consistent with achievement of 
its symmetric inflation goal.  Vasco will now continue our briefing. 
MR. CURDIA.  Thank you, Etienne.  My presentation materials start on slide 12.  
Key features of the economy have recently changed in ways that make the conduct of 
monetary policy more challenging, as Marc had mentioned.  First, both the natural 
rate of interest, or r*, and the natural rate of unemployment, or u*, were revised down 
in recent years, and substantial uncertainty remains about their values.  Second, the 
response of inflation to economic slack appears to have fallen in recent times—that is, 
the short-run Phillips curve has flattened.  Third, there is now a higher probability of 
hitting the effective lower bound during a downturn, due to the low level of r*.  
Fourth, in the wake of a prolonged period of below-target inflation, there are concerns 
July 30-31, 2019
8 of 329


 
 
 
about the stability of longer-run inflation expectations, which could make it difficult 
for the Committee to achieve its 2 percent inflation goal on a consistent basis.  This 
memo discusses how these factors change the tradeoffs that the Committee faces in 
pursuing the dual mandate within the current framework.  In our discussion, we use a 
simple but illustrative empirical model of the economy. 
Let me start with r* in slide 13.  Lower estimates of r* imply, other things being 
equal, lower interest rates, a more limited conventional policy space, and potentially 
worse economic outcomes.  This is true even when policymakers correctly estimate 
r*.  This exhibit illustrates how uncertainty about r* and proximity to the ELB 
produce asymmetric risks—which may prompt policymakers to err on the side of 
assuming a lower r*. 
In this scenario, we go back in time and assume that r* is 75 basis points lower 
than the estimated historical path starting in 2016.  Private-sector actors correctly 
perceive the drop, but policymakers may not.  We show optimal control simulations 
under discretion for three cases.  In black, policymakers perfectly perceive the lower 
r*.  In blue, policymakers perceive a higher r* than its actual value, failing to identify 
the drop.  In red, policymakers perceive a lower r* than its actual value, 
overestimating the drop. 
Let’s focus first on the real interest rate, shown on the top-right panel.  Compared 
with the perfect certainty case, overestimating r*, in blue, leads to a higher real 
interest rate, hence policy is tighter, leading to higher unemployment and lower 
inflation.  In response to the weaker economic conditions, the nominal federal funds 
rate is kept at the ELB for a protracted period of time.  This further constrains 
monetary policy and exacerbates economic weakness. 
In contrast, when policymakers perceive a lower r* than its actual value, in red, 
inflation no longer undershoots the 2 percent goal, while unemployment remains 
further below its natural rate.  As a consequence, the federal funds rate has a steeper 
path.  Recognizing the asymmetry in risks is particularly important when a prolonged 
period of below-target inflation could lead to longer-run inflation expectations 
drifting lower.  We turn to that scenario next. 
In slide 14, we show how a flatter Phillips curve and inflation expectations that 
adjust sluggishly to policy actions pose a challenge for policymakers.  The exhibit 
shows optimal control simulations for the period post-2019:Q1 without any further 
economic shocks for three different cases:  in black, baseline rational expectations 
with the estimated Phillips curve, which is relatively flat; in blue, inflation 
expectations are instead adaptive, which means essentially more tied to recent 
inflation readings than to the 2 percent long-run goal; in red, inflation expectations 
are again adaptive, but the Phillips curve is steeper. 
Baseline assumptions imply a gradual normalization of inflation and 
unemployment because of the flatter Phillips curve.  When instead expectations are 
adaptive, in blue, the inflation process is even more sluggish and attainment of the 
July 30-31, 2019
9 of 329


 
 
 
2 percent goal is more difficult.  In particular, it requires a more forceful easing 
stance to keep inflation from slipping too low and avoid a self-reinforcing low 
inflation cycle in which observed and expected inflation pull each other down.  As a 
result, unemployment substantially undershoots its natural rate. 
If, instead, the Phillips curve were steeper, then even under adaptive expectations, 
achieving the 2 percent inflation goal would not be as problematic, requiring less 
unemployment undershooting.  The next slide summarizes the main findings of the 
memo.  The first two items correspond to the previous analyses.  The other three are 
discussed in detail in the memo. 
But let me highlight a few things.  First, I will highlight the uncertainty about u* 
as being pervasive, making the determination of appropriate policy difficult.  When, 
in addition, the Phillips curve is flatter, inference about the current level of u* is made 
even more difficult.  This is because movements of the unemployment rate above and 
below its natural rate are reflected only modestly in changes in inflation.  Second, in a 
downturn, the limited policy space due to the ELB combined with a flatter Phillips 
curve may require a prolonged period of near-zero interest rates.  Third, despite 
arguments for easier policy near the ELB, periods of prolonged low interest rates 
could foster the buildup of financial vulnerabilities.  This consideration may warrant 
moderation in the usage of low rates for long periods.  But it is important to note how 
limited our understanding is of the linkage between low rates and financial instability, 
and of the effectiveness of raising interest rates to reduce the probability of financial 
instability. 
My last slide concludes with some implications of the analysis for potential 
revisions to the consensus statement.  In slide 16, the statement acknowledges some 
of the tradeoffs discussed here, and it is still early in the framework review for 
specifics.  However, our analysis suggests that a number of considerations that 
became important in recent times are not fully reflected in the Statement.  First, it 
could recognize that policy tradeoffs may be affected by the proximity to the ELB.  
Second, it could mention risk-management considerations in the vicinity of the 
ELB—namely, asymmetric risks due to uncertainty regarding r* and u* and the 
possibility of buildup of financial imbalances during prolonged periods of low 
interest rates, which might otherwise be desirable.  This concludes our prepared 
remarks.  We would be happy to take any questions. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Marc, Etienne, 
and Vasco?  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  So the last couple of slides have your caveat on financial stability.  
But just looking at your slide 13, “Misperceived r* Entails Asymmetric Costs,” alone—it seems 
July 30-31, 2019
10 of 329


 
 
 
to imply that the asymmetric costs ignore financial stability in this slide.  But you address it as a 
caveat in the last two slides. 
MR. CURDIA.  Yes. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you thought that “reach for yield” behavior actually did have 
consequences, would you make this slide less certain? 
MR. CURDIA.  Well, there’s definitely uncertainty associated with any of these lines that 
you see here to start with, even aside from financial instability.  When you consider financial 
instability issues, on the one hand, you’re weakening the financial sector that could further 
weaken the economy down the road.  On the other hand, you’re trying to prevent that buildup of 
financial instability from piling up.  That is something that is very hard to do.  In this model, it’s 
too simple to address that properly—that’s why we didn’t even attempt to do so.  We would 
leave that for further research. 
Actually, on one hand, if you look at the recent conferences about “leaning against the 
wind” and so on, researchers still have the take that the costs of trying to lean against the wind, 
or to adjust monetary policy for financial-stability purposes are greater than just mopping up 
after financial instabilities are realized.  On the other hand, there’s more and more evidence of 
this “reaching for yield,” and so there’s a lot of research effort going toward that direction to try 
to see if the assessment holds up that it’s still best to wait until something happens than to try to 
prevent it from happening.  But it’s still early to give you exact simulation results on that. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Just one quick follow-up.  One way to think about financial 
stability is, you want sustainable maximum unemployment and sustainable inflation, and so it 
implies not just getting there in the near term, but getting there through time.  Do you think the 
July 30-31, 2019
11 of 329


 
 
 
current framework captures that sustainability concept appropriately?  One way to think about 
financial stability is that sustainability over time. 
MR. CURDIA.  Well, in the current framework, it’s feasible to capture that sustainability 
concept appropriately.  There are evolving challenges that I tried to express, and the memo goes 
further—definitely, the effect that inflation expectations, for example, may be drifting down 
currently, but at some point it will be up as well.  That will be a challenge for the sustainable 
part. 
Regarding unemployment, of course, the issue is that it’s often hard to measure what’s 
the end game in terms of what’s really the rate of unemployment consistent with the mandate. 
I see financial instability as being something that will interfere with the dynamics and our 
ability to achieve our dual mandate, because if, on the one hand, you’re trying to ease policy to 
recover from weak economic conditions but, at the same time, you’re compromising a financial 
sector that may, down the road, bring us back to weak economic conditions, it’s definitely a 
concern and a challenge to accomplish the dual mandate in a sustainable way.  Again, it’s not 
just me, but many people feel that we have to do a whole lot more research on that. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The last comment, along with reading the slide on 
the financial stability risks and the implications for the conduct of monetary policy, is something 
that I think is very important.  And I guess I’m not quite sure exactly what the intention of the 
steering group is to cover that topic in future memos.  It occurred to me, when you talked about 
the interaction of financial stability and monetary policy lightly in the memo and in your 
briefing, this would interact with whether or not the Board has chosen to increase the 
countercyclical capital buffer.  If presented with the possibility that maybe we had to take the 
July 30-31, 2019
12 of 329


 
 
 
funds rate on a different path because of financial stability risk but the countercyclical capital 
buffer hadn’t been activated, that would make me wonder about a whole host of things.  And that 
interaction strikes me as an important topic.  I think you’re looking for suggestions on what we 
need to be talking about through the framework, and I guess this is sort of where I would throw 
that in there.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thomas. 
MR. LAUBACH.  If I can quickly weigh in here, since you raised the question to the 
steering committee.  So, clearly, in the memo that Vasco is covering, we tried to get at this issue 
of financial stability considerations affecting tradeoffs that the Committee is confronting.  As he 
also pointed out, there’s a great deal of uncertainty, arguably, in our understanding of possibly 
even the sign of the interest rate tool with regard to financial stability.  And so we are open to 
hearing suggestions.  But the key thing that we wanted to do here was simply to say:  This 
tradeoff has been in the mix.  The memo does give it some coverage in terms of, in particular, 
underlining what little we know about this relationship. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay, thanks very much.  If there are no further questions, before the 
go-round, I would like to turn it over to Governor Clarida for some introductory comments. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Well, thank you, Chair Powell.  And thank you to the staff for the 
excellent memos and especially to the steering committee for providing leadership in this 
process.  As the Chair mentioned, the day has arrived when our 2019 framework review begins 
the transition from the “Fed Listens” phase to the “FOMC deliberates” phase.  Of course, there 
are several more Fed Listens events scheduled in the fall, and I’m sure we will continue to 
benefit from the feedback, perspectives, and goodwill that we have gleaned from the Fed Listens 
enterprise. 
July 30-31, 2019
13 of 329


 
 
 
But the time has come for us as a Committee to begin to assess what we’ve learned with 
the benefit of rigorous economic analysis that will be presented in a number of staff briefings and 
memos starting today that we’ve just heard and then obviously continuing in FOMC meetings in 
the fall.  As Marc stated in laying out the roadmap, for the purposes of focusing on the main 
issues, we think of the framework as really being composed of three pillars:  the Statement of 
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; the existing toolkit that we deploy now or 
have deployed; and, in essence, a bygones-are-bygones approach in which our inflation objective 
is to reach a 2 percent rate of inflation and then keep it there. 
Now, as a practical matter, as many of you know, but just to remind us, our current 
framework shares much in common with flexible inflation-targeting strategies that many other 
central banks have adopted over the past 25 years.  However, I think it is important to note, and 
one thing I’ve come to appreciate in this process, is that our mandate is much more explicit about 
the role of employment than that of most other inflation-targeting central banks.  And, obviously, 
our consensus statement plays this up very explicitly by stating that when the two sides are in 
conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other.  I think the case can be made that the 
balanced approach did and has served the Committee well, especially in the aftermath of the 
Global Financial Crisis when high unemployment called for an unconventional policy mix that, 
ex ante, entailed some risk of inflation.  Ex post, it didn’t materialize, but, ex ante, the minutes 
and transcripts indicate that it was a concern. 
It’s also worth noting that among inflation-targeting central banks, there are different 
practices and approaches to defining the inflation target.  For example, some, like us here, and 
those of Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom define their target as a point.  Some define the 
target as a range around that objective—for example, Canada, New Zealand, and Sweden.  And 
July 30-31, 2019
14 of 329


 
 
 
at least one prominent central bank currently defines its target as a ceiling—that’s the European 
Central Bank (ECB), although that process is undergoing its own framework review.  Several 
other central banks define a horizon, such as over the medium term or on average over time, over 
which the target is to be achieved.  Australia and Switzerland are now in that category. 
Again, as I said, I should note that the ECB announced just last week that they are 
undergoing a rethinking of how they define their objective.  They introduced the symmetric 
concept recently, and they may even go further. 
While there’s no one way to do inflation targeting, what all inflation-targeting central 
banks do have in common is, they all respect a bygones-are-bygones approach that does not 
contemplate, communicate, guide, or try to achieve a future deliberate over- or undershoot of the 
inflation target in response to past misses.  And, in future FOMC meetings, we will be briefed by 
the staff on several alternatives to inflation targeting that have been proposed by respected 
academics and former and current policymakers.  Lars Svensson at the Chicago conference 
provided an insightful 30,000-foot review of a number of these strategies, and the System staff 
will do a “deeper dive” on these in the fall. 
Now, as I think we appreciate, but just to remind ourselves, I think there’s a reason why 
no central bank in the world has gone down this road, because the benefits of makeup strategies 
rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will be delivered 
when the time comes.  And, as is well known from economic research, makeup strategies in 
general are not time consistent, which simply means that if you go through a period when you’re 
missing inflation on the lower end, then at the future date when you achieve your inflation 
objective, the future policymaker—which may be a different Committee—does not have an 
incentive to redeem that past promise. 
July 30-31, 2019
15 of 329


 
 
 
So, obviously, because of this time inconsistency, to be successful, makeup strategies 
would have to be understood not only by the public, but also by the Committee to represent such 
a commitment.  A lot of academic and research work, including some that I’ve worked on, 
essentially assumes that problem away by assuming this commitment device exists, but 
obviously that will be an important consideration for us.  That’s why it’s important to note that 
no central bank today—although my friends in Sweden tell me that in 1935, the Swedes did 
price-level targeting, but I haven’t been able to translate the documents [laughter]—except, 
perhaps, Sweden in the ’30s, has attempted to do price-level targeting or a version of that. 
Now, following discussions of the strategies, we will receive a briefing later this fall on 
potential additions to our toolkit that we might consider, and the staff now plans to analyze more 
muscular variants of lower-for-longer strategies, such as threshold-based or time-based forward 
guidance.  And, of course, similar policies were deployed, to some extent, by the Committee in 
the aftermath of the financial crisis.  There would appear to be an important benefit of deploying 
robust forms of forward guidance in a way that expresses the will of a standing FOMC that are 
plausibly more credible than an alternative that promises that some future Committee at some 
future date would take an action.  And, again, the Committee had some experience with that in 
previous years. 
The staff also plans to brief us on the potential benefits and costs of quantity-based versus 
rate-based so-called yield curve control balance sheet tools.  At present, the Japanese do a 
version of yield curve control with a soft ceiling on 10-year yields, but yield curve control can be 
thought of really as a complement to forward guidance over perhaps a much narrower horizon—
say, 1 or 2 years. 
July 30-31, 2019
16 of 329


 
 
 
Finally, an important responsibility of the Committee as part of this review is to assess 
and execute on the best way to communicate any evolution or revolution in our framework that 
we may agree on.  In this regard, as our framework review evolves this fall, we, as Committee 
members, will want to consider and think hard about what, if any, changes to our consensus 
statement may be called for.  And as the staff highlighted, as it reads right now, I think there are 
at least four interrelated elements of the statement that will deserve our focus and attention as we 
work through communicating our thinking on the framework review.  As the staff indicated, 
these would include how the consensus statement addresses inflation expectations; the meaning 
and interpretation of symmetry; the time dimension over which the objective is to be achieved; 
and then something that’s omitted now from the statement—which is a reference to the effective 
lower bound. 
Let me conclude by saying that, as part of the framework review, the communications 
subcommittee has been gathering input from FOMC participants and from feedback in the Fed 
Listens events on possible ways in which the SEP and some other communications might be 
improved.  We have begun to discuss these at our meetings, and at some future meeting of the 
FOMC, we’ll present these ideas for possible discussion and consideration.  Thank you, Chair 
Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you, Rich.  And thank you for your leadership on this. 
Let’s proceed with the go-round.  Vice Chair Williams, would you like to lead off? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  First of all, I thank the staff—past, 
present, and future—because not only have you already done a lot of work and are doing a lot of 
work, but we know that there are a number of memos and presentations ahead of us, as we have 
already heard.  I think these memos and presentations will be really helpful to all of us in 
July 30-31, 2019
17 of 329


 
 
 
framing the issues, to understand what the evidence teaches us—and then really think about how 
we can best achieve our dual-mandate goals, which is really what all of this is about. 
Now, going back to the consensus statement, that’s kind of where I start and end, because 
I do think it’s been an incredibly helpful document since we first introduced it in 2012.  It has 
been helpful I think both to communicate our goals externally, obviously, but also to 
communicate our framework in a way that can then be used in our FOMC statements and other 
communications.  So I always think that everything hangs off the consensus statement, in terms 
of our decisionmaking and the framing of our decisions.  I think it’s also helped us internally to 
have a shared understanding of what our goals are and what our basic strategy is.  It has clarified 
that it’s not just about what our goals are, it’s really about how do we best achieve them.  So, 
again, I think the consensus statement is really, in a way, the anchor of our policy deliberations 
and decisions, and I think a successful completion of this process over the next year will end up 
with some revisions to our consensus statement. 
I think in terms of looking back at the consensus statement and thinking about the history 
of thinking about monetary policy, like many have already said and Governor Clarida 
mentioned, it does represent, I think, a pretty good statement of the consensus about monetary 
policy as of about a decade ago.  It makes no reference to the lower bound at all and makes no 
reference, obviously, to unconventional policies or any of these other issues.  It really is flying at 
a very high level. 
The word “strategy” has different meanings for different people, but I would put this at 
about 100,000 feet in terms of when we talk about strategy.  There is no oxygen up there, and 
there is not a lot of clarity about what the strategy really entails when reaching actual decisions.  
But, because the world has changed since 2012, I think the lessons of the past decade, which 
July 30-31, 2019
18 of 329


 
 
 
were nicely summarized in the memo, have taught us a lot about the world of an environment in 
which you have low r* and the proximity to the effective lower bound constraining monetary 
policy, obviously, not only in the United States, but throughout most advanced economies.  So, 
given that this is a new reality, I think it is a game-changer in thinking about monetary policy 
strategy and thinking about our consensus statement.  I think the memos, again, highlight the key 
factors that we should be thinking about as we go forward on this and the things that we should 
be thinking about how to address. 
So my comments are, just very briefly, I think, picking up on Governor Clarida’s 
comments.  When I look at the consensus statement, I think there are three areas on which we 
really do need to be focused.  And those are the areas that we need to be thinking about and I will 
be thinking about, in terms of our future discussions. 
One is what I see as a fundamental inconsistency between our symmetric inflation goal, 
as described in the left column of the statement—which I fully support—which says that we 
want to have 2 percent inflation, on average, and be symmetric around that, which I think of as 
inflation is above 2 percent about half the time and below 2 percent roughly half of the time.  
That’s a great goal.  That is what we want to achieve.  However, if you look at the right-hand 
column, which describes in the lower part what our actual policy strategy implementation is, it 
indicates that it’s basically a flexible inflation-targeting approach.  That approach is inconsistent 
with a symmetric 2 percent inflation target in a world of very low r* and the proximity of the 
effective lower bound, because that approach will tend to lead to inflation being biased too low.  
Flexible inflation targeting means inflation, on average, will run below target because of the 
constraint posed by the effective lower bound on our ability to react to negative shocks.  It also 
means inflation expectations can easily become anchored at too low a level.  So I think that’s one 
July 30-31, 2019
19 of 329


 
 
 
area that we are going to need to think hard about—how do we make sure that the description of 
our policy framework in the consensus statement is well aligned, in practice, with our goals of a 
symmetric inflation target? 
The second issue is really “walking the talk” on anchoring inflation expectations.  If you 
read this existing statement, it basically gives communication the lead role in this.  I’m reading 
from the statement:  “Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps 
keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored.”  So, in 2012, words obviously are 
important.  But I think what we’ve learned in the past decade is:  You need to have the actions 
that support the words.  We need to be delivering 2 percent inflation on average in order to 
reinforce, through the results of our actions, this anchoring of the 2 percent inflation 
expectations.  So, again, it’s something that I think we need to have clearly in our policy 
framework and in our consensus statement. 
And the third is really about, I think, some clarity about how we think about policy tools, 
the implementation of the strategy, and the role of uncertainty and risks in our decisionmaking.  
Again, having the low r* and proximity to the effective lower bound, I think, is fundamentally a 
different world in thinking about risk management and thinking about using unconventional 
policy than we had before.  So I would argue that instead of flying at 100,000 feet or even 60,000 
feet, it would be helpful to have this framework bring us down to maybe 30,000 feet or so—not 
into tactics, not into policy rules—but maybe greater clarity about what this means in terms of 
lower-for-longer and what that means in terms of using our tools in the future. 
The final comment I want to make is about financial stability.  Having lived through this 
and listening to President Rosengren’s question, I am conscious of the fact that, clearly, this is an 
issue that we are going to need to continue to think about and address in the statement.  I do 
July 30-31, 2019
20 of 329


 
 
 
think it’s important for us, when we discuss financial stability, to distinguish between long-run 
and short-run issues, and here I am picking up honestly on President Evans’s comments.  If r* is 
really that low, close to zero, then this is not about monetary policy strategy.  This is a reality of 
low interest rates.  This means that any concerns about financial stability in a lower-for-longer 
world are really structural more than cyclical. 
So I think that, when we think about this discussion, we should separate those two issues.  
One is, if there are structural issues holding the real interest rates low, and those lead to perhaps 
greater fragility in the financial system, we need to think of structural policies that will mitigate 
those risks, because that’s not about raising or lowering interest rates.  It’s about where interest 
rates are on average.  Similarly, when we think about the cyclical decisions on monetary policy, 
how quickly do we want to bring inflation back to target or respond to shocks?  We should also 
think about what other policy tools do we have that might mitigate financial stability risks? 
Sometimes I hear this discussion of lower-for-longer become conflated with just very low 
interest rates.  And if that’s the reality, we should be addressing that structural reality and not 
conflating that with short-term policy decisions.  I know that Vasco doesn’t want to promise new 
memos on this in the short run, but as we work on this framework project, we need to be clear 
with ourselves and with the public about what our framework is and how we’re thinking about 
these various issues.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Just a comment on the process.  
I think the process has worked quite well.  I think the listening tour was quite effective, and the 
Chicago conference worked out very well.  And I would say, the very thoughtful process in 
which we’re going through the set of issues over the course of these meetings between now and 
July 30-31, 2019
21 of 329


 
 
 
the end of the year was long overdue, for some of the reasons that were just highlighted.  A lot in 
the world has changed, and this is really a great time to be doing this analysis.  I’m glad we’re 
spending as much time as we are, because I think it is critically important. 
I’m just going to provide answers to the three questions posed to us in the memo, and I’ll 
just do it in the order that we were asked.  The first was the advantages and disadvantages of the 
current framework.  The operating framework should be designed so as to put the FOMC in the 
best position to achieve its congressionally mandated goals.  Because the Federal Reserve has a 
dual mandate, with both stable inflation and maximum employment as its objectives, the FOMC 
could react more aggressively at the outset of the financial crisis than many other central banks.  
So the dual nature of our mandate has served the public very well. 
The 2012 Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, in addition to 
stating an explicit inflation target, has further cemented the importance of the dual mandate.  I 
think the Committee and the public have also been well served by having a more explicit 
framework document that is voted on at each January organizational meeting.  It is an important 
tool that should be referenced more not just in our public communications, but also internally 
during our policy deliberations. 
The dual mandate, along with the resulting emphasis on a balanced approach to policy in 
the 2012 Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy document, provided a 
compelling rationale for aggressively using unconventional monetary policy tools at the effective 
lower bound.  It is less clear, however, that the Committee has followed a balanced approach 
since liftoff from the effective lower bound.  Several factors are likely to have played a role in 
policy decisions deviating from the framework’s simple characterization of the loss function. 
July 30-31, 2019
22 of 329


 
 
 
This deviation could have been the result of the median SEP forecast not having been a 
good proxy for voting members’ positions or policy decisions based on risk-management 
concerns.  For a variety of reasons, probing for better labor outcomes likely served the 
Committee well at the early stage of the liftoff, but it is too early to assess the merits of more 
recent deviations from the balanced approach.  A lot hinges on future inflation developments and 
risks to financial stability.  Regardless of how one views the deviations from the balanced 
approach, a more methodical discussion of the reasons for moving away from the current 
framework’s reaction function would be helpful, both internally and in communications with the 
public.  Communications are a crucial component of the current framework.  Much progress has 
been made on this front over time, but more is probably needed. 
In terms of the different uses of the tools, the second question, we utilized balance sheet 
tools and forward guidance to address a financial crisis and a very deep recession, with little 
historical experience, uncertain political support, and concerns with exit strategy.  Knowing what 
we know now, it is probable that we should have continued to use the tools more aggressively to 
achieve our mandate more quickly.  And, in retrospect, setting economic triggers for 
discontinuing quantitative easing might have been a more effective way of addressing tapering. 
In terms of the balance sheet, I am convinced that we can provide meaningful 
accommodation at the effective lower bound.  However, as Japan and Europe have shown us, it 
is clearly no guarantee of a quick exit from the effective lower bound, and in both Japan and 
Europe, where much of the yield curve is negative still, additional stimulus is most likely 
productive if it focuses on spreads associated with more risky assets. 
In the United States, with our limitations to purchase only Treasury and agency 
securities, we could find ourselves with no additional effective tools in an extended period at the 
July 30-31, 2019
23 of 329


 
 
 
effective lower bound.  More effectively using forward guidance and targeting rates further out 
on the yield curve seem like strategies that we should consider more seriously.  For example, 
explicitly targeting rates further out the yield curve, coupled with forward guidance that 
reinforces the intentions and expected duration of such balance sheet policy, could prove 
effective.  
With regard to the third question, several changes could enhance the Statement on 
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  First, there is no recognition of the challenge 
posed by the higher risks of hitting the effective lower bound when r* is low.  Globally, this has 
been a significant problem, and we should recognize that, when setting policy, central banks 
must consider the monetary policy challenges at the effective lower bound.  It may, for example, 
be a time when we target an inflation rate at the high end of the tolerable range if we switch to an 
explicit range rather than a single target.  As well as adopting a strategy that makes this a 
somewhat less likely outcome, I would advocate for a more explicit acknowledgement that 
balance sheet and forward guidance are, by necessity, monetary policy tools at the effective 
lower bound. 
Second, we should deal with financial stability more explicitly.  We want our dual 
mandate to be achieved over time.  The past two recessions have been significantly affected by 
financial stability-related issues, resulting in a significant miss of our dual-mandate goals for 
much of the subsequent decade.  Short-term achievement of the dual mandate should not be at 
the expense of financial stability concerns, which makes achieving the dual mandate in the future 
much less likely. 
Third, while the current Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategies 
emphasizes the symmetry of the 2 percent inflation target, I would explicitly adopt an acceptable 
July 30-31, 2019
24 of 329


 
 
 
range for inflation around 2 percent—say, between 1.5 and 2.5 percent.  The constraint that we 
always aim to hit the 2 percent target seems appropriate if there are reasons to believe that the 
economy will hit the effective lower bound rarely and for a short time. 
If, instead, effective lower bound episodes are more likely and potentially longer lasting, 
it would be reasonable to relax the constraint mildly.  In this setting, when monetary policy is 
constrained by the effective lower bound, forward guidance would be used to promise more time 
in the upper half of the range once the economy has recovered from the recession.  Such a 
framework would be more effective at delivering a 2 percent inflation rate on average.  In 
looking back, it is evident that such a strategy might have made a larger fraction of the 
Committee more comfortable with more accommodative policy over the past several years.  
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  To start, let me say I’m very supportive of the 
Committee’s undertaking this review of our policy framework.  The Committee did take 
unprecedented policy actions to address the financial crisis and Great Recession, and there is 
reason to believe—based on the aging of the population, expected slowdown in population 
growth, higher demand for safe assets, and other facts—that the longer-term equilibrium real 
interest rate will remain lower than in past decades.  For both these reasons, reviewing our 
framework and the tools with which we implement monetary policy to achieve our dual-mandate 
goals is timely. 
Now, if the Committee decides to change its framework—and here, in particular, I’m 
talking about changing from flexible inflation targeting to a makeup strategy—it’s going to have 
implications for the setting of monetary policy well into the future.  So it’s important that our 
July 30-31, 2019
25 of 329


 
 
 
review be a thorough one.  I appreciate the analysis that’s been done by the staff to date, but my 
biggest “ask” as we go forward is that the staff incorporate multiple models and examine 
different perspectives in its analysis, in order to ensure that any conclusions are robust. 
Before changing the framework, it would be useful if the Committee tests, through 
“tabletop” exercises or some other means, how any proposed framework would play out in 
real-time decisionmaking and across different economic scenarios and to examine how our 
decisions and communications might have changed if we had been operating under an alternative 
framework instead of the current one.  My understanding is that forthcoming staff analyses of 
alternative frameworks will incorporate some robustness checks.  I want to encourage the staff to 
go further, as I believe that thorough robustness testing and analysis of alternative perspectives 
are needed when the Committee is contemplating something as significant as a change in the 
framework.  This will also aid our communications, as it will reassure the public that we 
considered a range of perspectives and did not succumb to groupthink in coming to our 
conclusions. 
Many of the alternative frameworks that have been proposed have theoretical appeal, but 
none of them are without implementation challenges.  For example, many of them work well in 
models featuring perfect credibility and commitment and in which the public understands the 
framework and believes future Committees will follow through, and in which the Committee 
actually does follow through.  Even under the current framework, commitment has been a 
challenge for the Committee.  Under the alternative frameworks that entail inflation makeup 
strategies, issues of credibility and commitment loom even larger.  One needs to ask whether it’s 
credible for policymakers to commit to keep interest rates low to make up for past shortfalls of 
July 30-31, 2019
26 of 329


 
 
 
inflation from target even when demand is growing strongly or to act to bring inflation down in 
the face of a supply shock by tightening policy even in the face of weak demand. 
The framework analysis being done to evaluate the benefits and costs of each framework 
needs to be explicit about the assumptions underlying each model used in the analysis.  We need 
to understand the implications of different assumptions about how the public and market 
participants form expectations, levels of credibility of policymakers, and limits on the ability or 
desire of policymakers to commit to future policy action.  We need to know what happens if the 
Phillips curve, which is flat now, steepens more abruptly than assumed even if that’s not the 
modal view.  In addition, we need to acknowledge head-on that monetary policy decisions are 
necessarily made in an environment of uncertainty.  Our data are revised.  There are 
measurement issues involved, and distinguishing demand shocks and supply shocks is difficult. 
As the memos point out, there’s uncertainty about some of the underlying structural 
aspects of the economy, including the equilibrium interest rate and potential output growth.  
There’s model uncertainty, including regarding the transmission mechanism of monetary policy 
and inflation, employment, and growth.  These uncertainties suggest that we cannot limit the 
framework analysis to one model of the economy. 
The analysis also has to take seriously issues that are rarely incorporated into our models.  
The political economy issues surrounding balance sheet policies are one example of this type of 
an issue.  Our narrow set of countercyclical tools for fostering financial stability is another 
example. 
Indeed, our workhorse models are quite limited when it comes to studying the nexus 
between monetary policy and financial stability.  So we need to seek out other models, as the 
July 30-31, 2019
27 of 329


 
 
 
interplay between macro stability and financial stability is likely to become more important in a 
low interest rate environment. 
In terms of the questions:  The memo asked whether the current framework of flexible 
inflation targeting constrained the Committee from taking appropriate action to address the Great 
Recession, which might suggest a change in framework is needed, or whether the Committee 
could have taken more effective actions even under the current framework, which might suggest 
no change is needed.  This may be a good heuristic device, but I’m not sure I agree with the 
memo’s conclusions.  Hindsight can be 20–20, while decisionmaking in real time is difficult, 
partly because of the uncertainties that I mentioned. 
The staff memo, to my mind, too easily dismisses the political-economy concerns 
expressed by some Committee members at the time about balance sheet policies and interest on 
reserves.  Indeed, some outsiders—that is, not those on the Committee—continue to call for 
eliminating interest on reserves, viewing it as a transfer to banks.  Now, I wasn’t on the 
Committee then, but as I recall, some Committee members were concerned about potential 
congressional backlash were the extraordinary tools pushed too far—which would have 
undermined the use of these tools in the future. 
I’m also not sure about the staff’s assessment that forward guidance didn’t create much 
confusion.  The form of the Committee’s forward guidance underwent several revisions, from 
qualitative guidance to calendar dates to economic thresholds and then to a combination of 
calendar-based and state-based guidance.  As I recall, explaining the changes was not that easy 
as the Committee struggled with commitment. 
Finally, even if some of the risks associated with balance sheet policies and forward 
guidance didn’t become reality, this does not mean that the Committee was wrong to take such 
July 30-31, 2019
28 of 329


 
 
 
risks seriously at the time.  It could be that being less aggressive with these tools actually 
lowered some of the costs and risks of using them.  Risk-based policymaking means considering 
risks that won’t necessarily be realized and the effect of actions on those risks. 
I do think that the current framework of flexible inflation targeting, which includes an 
explicit 2 percent symmetric inflation objective and a balanced approach to achieving our dual-
mandate goals, has served the Committee well in effectively promoting our policy goals.  The 
Great Recession was very deep, and the Committee needed to use extraordinary policy tools.  
Now the U.S. economy has recovered to a sustained period of growth, strong labor markets, and 
inflation near our target, and we have normalized our policy settings.  I believe being explicit 
about the Committee’s inflation target helped anchor long-run inflation expectations as the 
economy emerged from a period of economic weakness and substantial policy accommodation. 
Now, that’s not to say there aren’t things that can make the framework more effective.  In 
view of the imperfect precision with which monetary policy can control inflation and secure our 
dual mandate, I think it’s worth considering whether we would be better off defining the inflation 
goal in terms of a range centered on 2 percent rather than a point target.  It’s difficult to believe 
that the economic effect of 1.8 percent inflation would be significantly different from 2 percent 
inflation or that the public sees the difference as material, particularly in light of inflation 
perceptions that are actually a good bit higher as suggested in surveys and our Fed Listens 
sessions.  The point target, rather than a range, may be complicating our communications and 
policy decisions. 
Another thing to consider is the level of the inflation target.  I understand that this has 
been taken off the table in the framework discussion.  For several reasons, it seems hard to make 
a case to exclude an evaluation of the costs and benefits of raising the inflation target even if, in 
July 30-31, 2019
29 of 329


 
 
 
the end, we land on 2 percent.  These reasons include the memos’ emphasis on the challenges 
posed by the effective lower bound in an environment of low longer-run equilibrium real interest 
rates, the conclusions reached by economists outside the Fed and the fact that the Bank of 
Canada has included such an analysis in its regular framework review. 
Now, regardless of the framework the Committee ultimately decides on, the public’s 
expectations about future monetary policy are an important part of the transmission mechanism 
of policy to the economy, so effective communication will be an essential component of the 
framework.  At present, the Committee’s Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy 
document does a credible job of discussing the goals but, to my mind, does not offer much in the 
way of strategy.  And I think there are some opportunities of better clarifying our strategy. 
First, we could take a more systematic approach to our policy decisions and how we 
communicate those decisions.  This includes our strategy for our policy interest rates, our 
balance sheet policies, and our forward guidance, as well as the potential use of negative interest 
rates, which have been used in the euro area and are another way of addressing the challenge of 
the lower bound.  If we were more systematic in how we go about using each of these tools and 
under what circumstances, our communications will be clearer, and we could better align the 
public’s policy expectations with policy decisions. 
With regard to the nontraditional tools, we could clarify under what conditions we would 
start and stop using these tools and the mix of assets we might purchase.  This could vary with 
the nature of the shocks hitting the economy. 
Increasing the public’s understanding of how we conduct monetary policy could help 
insulate monetary policy from short-run political considerations and offer more policy continuity 
over time as Committee membership changes.  The communications challenge for the 
July 30-31, 2019
30 of 329


 
 
 
Committee is to give the public a good sense of how monetary policy is likely to respond 
conditional on how the economy evolves without implying that policy is pre-committed to a 
particular path regardless of how the economy evolves. 
Second, we could clarify the Committee’s views on how to balance macroeconomic and 
financial stability concerns, the use of tools to achieve each, and the governance framework for 
making these decisions.  With the financial stability concerns that arise with long periods of low 
interest rates, this would be a good time for the Committee to begin formal discussions about the 
nexus between monetary policy and financial stability needed to reach a consensus.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.2  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  This is a very good review process, and the 
comments so far clearly reflect that.  As I prepared these remarks, I took note of the fact that the 
composition of the FOMC has changed quite a lot since we adopted our Statement on Longer-
Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy in 2012.  So, since I have become one of the old guard 
here, I thought I would stay in that form and talk a little bit about how we got where we are 
today.  And, of course, it’s in my nature anyway.  [Laughter] 
But more importantly, we’re all familiar with the prudent financial investor’s lament.  It 
wasn’t that long ago that financial markets were in turmoil due to the Global Financial Crisis, 
and today markets are behaving almost as if the crisis never occurred.  Have investors forgotten 
important lessons?  Monetary policy should not make such a mistake.  There are a lot of lessons 
of the 2008–15 period that I want to stress in these strategy discussions, but the main one that I 
learned is that once the effective lower bound enters the realm of meaningful possibility, the 
 
2 The materials used by Mr. Evans are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
July 30-31, 2019
31 of 329


 
 
 
value of ambitious, aggressive, do-what-it-takes policymaking goes way up.  More timid, 
conservative policymaking approaches will not get the job done. 
I want to thank the staff for these informative and thought-provoking memos.  Many 
interesting perspectives were offered.  Regarding the historical experience discussed in the first 
memo, I found it particularly noteworthy that the 0.75 percent annual pace of decline in the 
unemployment rate from 2009 to 2015, roughly, was typical of other recoveries.  I found this 
noteworthy, because the FOMC needed to expand its balance sheet to $4.5 trillion and use 
calendar-based and threshold forward guidance in order to achieve this normal outcome.  
Fighting the effective lower bound was far from a business-as-usual experience, and, as 
President Mester’s comments mentioned, it was different, and explaining that to everybody was 
a challenge, no doubt about it. 
Indeed, we embarked on open-ended quantitative easing and threshold forward guidance 
in the fall of 2012 largely because of the poor expected performance of the labor market.  The 
unemployment rate was 8.3 percent then, and unless you thought the natural rate of 
unemployment was above 7 percent, the outlook was extremely unsatisfying. 
The Bernanke Fed’s version of do-what-it-takes monetary policy was crucial in 
generating the typical labor market improvements that we observed.  But, as aggressive as 
monetary policy was in 2012, maybe our earlier efforts were too timid and too conservative.  
Maybe we should have done more back in 2010 when the unemployment rate was still near 10 
percent, and it was pretty clear that the recovery was going to be challenging.  Instead of simply 
hoping for a much better-than-average historical recovery, maybe we should have stimulated the 
economy not with the aim of achieving a typical pace of decline in the unemployment rate, but 
July 30-31, 2019
32 of 329


 
 
 
with a goal of closing the overall unemployment rate gap within a more normal historical time 
frame—less than the six years it actually took. 
Clearly, aggressive actions in the fall of 2012 were consistent with our January 2012 
framework, as we took those actions under the framework.  And, today, I think our current 
framework has the potential to serve us as well, as long as we keep a steely and explicit focus on 
attaining our inflation and maximum-employment objectives over an appropriate period.  This is 
outcome-based monetary policy, and I think the reference to an appropriate time frame is 
extremely important and deserves much more discussion than we’ve had in the past.  I agree with 
the comments that Vice Chair Williams and Governor Clarida made earlier on that point.  Do-
what-it-takes, outcome-based policy should include an expected time-to-improvement. 
The second memo stressed many challenges that the FOMC faces now and will likely 
face in the future.  The economic environment is the main culprit, in my opinion.  Trend growth 
of around 1.75 percent seems justified on the basis of low labor input growth and moderate 
productivity trends.  This, together with a global environment that is similar or worse, leads to 
low equilibrium policy rates.  In this setting, the likelihood of revisiting the effective lower 
bound is too high for comfort.  Even a modest downward shock could lead to a prolonged stay at 
the effective lower bound, with unsatisfactory employment and inflation outcomes. 
A lot of work has been done indicating that in this economic environment, optimal 
outcome-based responses might benefit from alternative monetary policy approaches, like 
average inflation targeting or temporary price-level targeting.  But our discussion of those 
policies is coming in September.  Today’s meeting is focused on working through the strengths 
and weaknesses of the current framework.  I think our current framework can take us far.  But for 
it to do so, we need to establish an appropriate working definition of our symmetric inflation 
July 30-31, 2019
33 of 329


 
 
 
objective.  This is perhaps the key issue that needs to be addressed in ensuring effective 
monetary policy under the current framework. 
First, I think our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategies 
definitely allows the FOMC to seek, affirmatively, an overshoot of our 2 percent inflation 
objective.  I disagree with the roadmap memo’s characterization that it does not.  Recall that, in 
December 2012, the FOMC adopted a threshold forward-guidance policy that indicated that the 
federal funds rate would not be increased at least as long as the unemployment rate was above 
6.5 percent and inflation stayed below 2.5 percent.  So, in the pursuit of lower unemployment, 
the FOMC was willing to generate inflation above 2 percent. 
Second, as the roadmap memo highlights, the sentence introduced into the Statement of 
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy in January 2016 on symmetry can be a 
powerful tool.  At the time of those discussions, I strongly believed that the FOMC’s approach to 
letting inflation gradually rise to 2 percent was too timid.  Indeed, our efforts likely were being 
hampered by entrenched public beliefs that the Committee would tighten policy to ensure that 
inflation did not rise above 2 percent. 
I thought that the Committee’s main objective in adopting the “symmetric” language was 
to indicate more clearly that 2 percent was not a ceiling—2 percent is a target.  That being the 
case, our framework needed to allow explicitly for periods of inflation above 2 percent.  As Vice 
Chair Williams mentioned, 50 percent of the time inflation is above 2 percent. and 50 percent of 
the time it is below 2 percent is one way you might think about that.  I do. 
I felt that communicating this understanding could bolster inflation expectations and thus 
remove an important drag on achieving our objective and generate a consensus in favor of 
greater specificity on policy actions, especially agreement among Committee members on how 
July 30-31, 2019
34 of 329


 
 
 
to achieve symmetry.  That was simply too difficult a task for the challenges and disagreements 
over policy at that time.  We couldn’t get there.  Nevertheless, the affirmation that our inflation 
objective is symmetric did indicate that the Committee would view an extended period of 
inflation below 2 percent as unacceptable and would act to rectify the situation. 
What should those actions look like?  There’s a handout that was distributed.  In the 
handout, I generated of a very simple chart for you.  Consider one of the first scenarios in the 
second memo in which the constraints associated with the effective lower bound can cause a 
prolonged undershooting of inflation.  I distributed a very simple chart to visualize a couple of 
possible policy responses.  The green path labeled “πA” expects inflation to rise deliberately but 
gradually to 2 percent.  I think this approach has challenges.  As the staff memos note, the 
economic and risk environment here makes downward inflation shocks more costly than upward 
ones.  Furthermore, this asymmetry can generate lower inflation expectations by the public.  In 
other words, the effective lower bound, together with a reluctance to use policy aggressively, 
would reinforce low inflation outcomes. 
The path labeled “πB” envisions more aggressive policy actions that lead to a moderate 
overshoot and quicker attainment of the inflation objective.  And if downward inflation shocks 
are realized along this path, 2 percent may still be achieved sooner than in the πA path. 
As I contemplate the most appropriate conduct of monetary policy actions when risks in 
the effective lower bound loom large, I think affirmative overshooting policies are in line with 
the existing framework to avoid persistent underruns.  Overly conservative and timid approaches 
risk substantial periods of undershooting.  Of course, communicating more strongly that the 
expected conduct of monetary policy will support affirmative overshooting action is still 
something that we have to discuss. 
July 30-31, 2019
35 of 329


 
 
 
Finally, let me briefly touch on another important issue for the framework discussions.  
Our public Fed Listens reviews have reinforced, for me, the point that the FOMC needs to clarify 
how we think about maximum employment.  Many briefings, research papers, and the second 
memo highlight the flatness of the Phillips curve in the short run.  I think we need to consider 
seriously how we would analyze, project, and take policy actions to guide inflation to target in a 
world in which there is no Phillips curve.  Not just flat—but a world in which it’s really not 
relevant in any way. 
If the entire inflation proposition comes down to inflation expectations alone, then we 
have to think about what that means.  What would be the inflation-generating process?  Should 
we resurrect old theories and monetary models to help guide that?  Would they be relevant?  
Should we appeal to the fiscal theory of the price level?  Maybe that would be what determines 
inflation. 
We need to have a better idea of that in case the Phillips curve just doesn’t help us much 
in the future.  Now, this is too much for today, but this is a topic that deserves serious 
consideration for our review.  If the Phillips curve is, indeed, flat, then we need to clarify what 
we think the cost of 3 percent unemployment is.  If it is not a harbinger of future inflation, what 
is the cost?  I thought the Fed Listens panel that President Rosengren moderated was particularly 
interesting on this topic.  Maurice Jones of the Local Initiative Support Cooperation, or LISC, 
stressed that employment is the best tool for fighting poverty and noted the many economic 
challenges faced by low-income communities even when the unemployment rate is 3.6 percent. 
At the conference, Eric mentioned the risk that a substantial undershooting of the natural 
rate of unemployment could be followed by a very difficult recession with high unemployment 
as national labor markets recalibrate.  I heard Jones challenge that view and respond that, in the 
July 30-31, 2019
36 of 329


 
 
 
communities in which he’s working, it always feels like a recession.  It has only been recently, 
with the unemployment rate at historic lows, that meaningful opportunities have penetrated these 
communities.  Sustaining low unemployment offers the hope of stronger attachments to the 
workforce and the associated and important structural benefits. 
All of this makes me think that we need a lot more work and discussion on the monetary 
policy cost of moving the economy beyond some measure of maximum employment.  If it’s not 
a harbinger of future inflation, what is it, in terms of the cost?  If it is a harbinger of future 
inflation, okay—we understand that that has some risk. 
In sum, I look forward to further discussions about alternative strategies that might help 
the FOMC achieve the appropriate degree of accommodation.  In the face of the effective lower 
bound and other challenges, I know that we will better understand our strategic policy options 
following this review.  I think we’re going to have challenges, but I expect that the FOMC will 
be well served if we focus first on clarifying the meaning of our dual-mandate goals of 2 percent 
symmetric inflation and maximum employment and second on being more explicit about how 
the conduct of monetary policy will support the attainment of these outcomes.  Our current 
Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is a powerful tool, and enhancing 
it can take us a long way.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  And thanks very much to the staff for the 
memos and the ongoing work in this area.  I think it’s a very good summary of all the issues.  
These are difficult issues and difficult to organize.  So I think it’s really been excellent work. 
My general comment would be that I think this is a very welcome framework review that 
we are undertaking.  I think it’s a great time to be doing this, during 2019.  I think it’s a best 
July 30-31, 2019
37 of 329


 
 
 
practice in central banking.  So I think all of this is excellent, and I welcome it.  Chair Powell 
even said that it was “exciting.”  That’s not a word I hear a lot in macroeconomics.  [Laughter]  
Even though it’s a best practice, I don’t think it’s easy to do a framework review.  It drags up all 
kinds of deep issues in monetary economics and macroeconomics, and the art here is going to be 
deciding what can we actually do to tweak our framework in the next six months, as opposed to 
trying to resolve all of these deep issues. 
I’m willing to accept, for the purposes of this discussion, the definition of the current 
framework as a version of flexible inflation targeting consisting of the Statement of Longer-Run 
Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy—or the “SLRGMPS,” if you like the acronym—a set of 
tools to include interest rate policy, forward guidance, balance sheet policy, and possibly 
negative interest rate policy or yield curve control or other types of policies that have been used 
by other central banks, and, finally, a bygones-are-bygones approach to inflation targeting.  And 
I think that is an accurate short summary of what our framework actually is, and I’m willing to 
work with that. 
I see the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy as the only 
existing communications channel for announcing a framework change for this Committee, but I 
would stress to the group that I think this vehicle is extremely limited, as its ability to handle 
difficult concepts is very narrow.  The idea that you can artfully incorporate the subtleties of the 
macroeconomic debates into this four-paragraph statement, I think, is a bit of a heroic 
assumption.  The r* debates and u* debates and others are probably best left for the supporting 
research literature. 
So I guess one thing I’d like to get the Committee to think about is, are there ways that 
we can convey subtleties about our flexible inflation-targeting framework other than through the 
July 30-31, 2019
38 of 329


 
 
 
statement itself?  A white paper would be one idea, or some sort of summary, or—we already do 
conferences, conference volumes, things like that that can do justice to these very difficult issues, 
as opposed to a word or a phrase that might be put into the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy.  The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is 
quasi-constitutional in nature and needs widespread support for the Committee to be effective.  It 
has often been called the consensus statement.  I believe Chair Yellen often used the phrase 
“consensus statement.” 
I agree with Vice Chair Williams that it’s a 100,000-foot document, but there’s a reason 
it’s 100,000 feet.  It’s because, when you start getting to lower levels, there starts to be more 
disagreement about what should actually be in there and what can be agreed to by the entire 
Committee. 
When we first put this together in 2011 and adopted it in 2012, it was very important to 
have what I would call “big tent” language.  I would say the phrase “balanced approach” was the 
best example of the big tent language, because the balanced approach phrase could be interpreted 
a lot of different ways by a lot of different people around the table.  In summary, I would say that 
the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy was originally meant as a 
statement of the United States adopting an inflation target, and it was a goals statement and not a 
tactics statement.  I’m hearing some of the discussion around here trying to push toward more of 
a tactics statement.  I think it is going to be very difficult to get consensus supporting that. 
These considerations seem to rule out using the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy to discuss which tools should be used under various circumstances.  I 
think the best that we can say about the tools is that there are many, that they may be at least 
July 30-31, 2019
39 of 329


 
 
 
marginally effective, and that we reserve the right to use them if we think it will help us achieve 
our goals in various situations that the country might face in the future. 
Similarly, financial stability concerns are very legitimate, but we do not have very good 
models that describe the connections between financial stability and monetary policy.  I think it 
is going to be hard to get a clear statement of what our policy is with regard to the interaction of 
monetary policy and financial stability into this Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary 
Policy Strategy. 
If we can make any constructive changes to the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy, it may be in the area of the nature of the symmetry of the inflation 
target, which is really the only area in which we’ve tried to make revisions since we adopted it in 
2012.  And I agree with some of the comments of Vice Chair Williams in this regard.  The 
current symmetry language looks backward instead of forward and expresses concern only about 
past misses of the inflation target—but does not make a call to action if there have been past 
misses of the inflation target.  We may be able to revise the language to beef up our commitment 
to actually achieving the inflation target on average over time. 
Governor Clarida’s opening comments stressed that such strategies are time 
inconsistent—that is, that future Committees may not honor commitments made by past 
Committees.  I would temper that thought a little bit.  I think that we could beef up our 
commitment and make it better than what it is today.  It may not be totally perfect the way it is in 
macroeconomic models, but it could be better than it is today. 
Many models and analyses suggest that such a commitment would materially improve 
macroeconomic outcomes and so help the Committee better achieve its goals.  Strengthening 
commitment might allow the Committee to take a step in the direction of price-level targeting or 
July 30-31, 2019
40 of 329


 
 
 
its close cousin, nominal GDP targeting, which may help us avoid the effective lower bound in 
the future. 
Question number one in the materials for this discussion asks if flexible inflation 
targeting has inhibited the Committee from achieving its goals since being officially adopted in 
January of 2012.  The central lesson in monetary economics and central banking over the past 
20 years is this:  Not only is the effective lower bound a constraint on monetary policy, but it is 
also, potentially, an absorbing steady state from which an economy may not escape in any 
reasonable amount of time.  That is the experience of the Bank of Japan over the past 25 years, 
and something similar may be unfolding in Europe today.  Many smaller economies also seem to 
be in this situation. 
This was pointed out in the literature by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe in 2001 in 
their famous “Perils of Taylor Rules” paper.  The memos do acknowledge the current proximity 
to the effective lower bound without acknowledging the potential for the current state to become 
the steady state.  The memos understand it as an unmooring of inflation expectations to the 
downside.  I would just explain this as, if inflation expectations become unmoored to the 
downside, there is a steady state there, which means that the economy can actually get stuck at a 
situation of zero inflation or possibly negative inflation like Japan has, whereas, if inflation 
expectations get unmoored to the high side, there is no steady state there.  So what you see is 
high and variable inflation in that situation, as we’ve seen around the world—for instance, in 
Turkey or elsewhere today or certainly in developed economies during the 1970s. 
So there is a difference between having unmoored expectations to the upside and to the 
downside but, in either case, there will certainly be unsatisfactory outcomes for the Committee.  
July 30-31, 2019
41 of 329


 
 
 
The danger for us is on the low side—you may not be able to find your way back to the inflation 
target once the inflation expectations become unmoored to the downside. 
The best way to avoid this outcome in the United States—and we’re still in a great 
position to avoid the Japanese outcome or the European outcome—is by rigorously maintaining 
the credibility of the Committee’s 2 percent inflation target.  And in this, I very much agree with 
the comments of President Evans and Vice Chair Williams.  One way to do this may be to take a 
step toward price-level targeting in the 2020 revision to the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy. 
I have a brief comment on ranges, as opposed to a target for inflation.  I am concerned 
about drifting toward a target range for inflation in the current situation.  I think that if we name 
a target range instead of having a point target for inflation, it may weaken our commitment to a 2 
percent inflation objective.  If we went to a range, I think the message would be that 1.5 percent 
inflation is okay.  The Committee is satisfied with that.  We don’t need to take action to change 
that.  But my discussion here is suggesting that that’s exactly the thing we want to change.  We 
want to move toward 2 percent inflation faster or even move above 2 percent inflation, as 
President Evans was talking about just a moment ago.  So I think it’s the wrong moment to think 
about going to a comfort zone for monetary policy, and for those newer members of the 
Committee, I might point you to an older speech by a former member, Rick Mishkin:  “Comfort 
Zones, Shmumfort Zones.”  [Laughter] 
Also, as I understand it, communications will be discussed at a later meeting.  I have 
strong views on this, and I’ll just make a few comments here.  I do think we need to reform the 
Summary of Economic Projections.  In my opinion, we essentially have two policy statements, 
one of which is coordinated carefully at the meeting here and one of which is uncoordinated, and 
July 30-31, 2019
42 of 329


 
 
 
sometimes these two policy statements are in conflict.  This is creating ongoing problems for the 
Committee at various junctures. 
Also, the SEP is based on a calendar year—which can box the Committee in during the 
second half of the year—something we’re going to face very shortly here at upcoming meetings.  
I think we need more urgency on this challenge for the Committee.  We’re going to have to fish 
or cut bait on this and make a decision.  We need to straighten this out soon.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Like others, I would like to give my praise for the 
process, the framework review, the Fed Listens events, the steering committee, and the memos.  I 
really think this is what makes us strong, and these deliberations or discussions are very helpful 
in thinking through these issues.  And, since I’m new to the Committee, I’m going to bookend 
President Evans, and, instead of summarizing lived history, I’m going to summarize sort of 
studied history and where that makes me think about the path forward. 
By now, the experiences here, in Japan, in Europe, and elsewhere clearly demonstrate 
that the effective lower bound is a significant constraint on monetary policy in our current policy 
framework.   There has been a secular decline in r*, for the reasons that President Mester 
mentioned, so the effective lower bound is a constraint that is much more likely to bind in the 
future, hindering our ability to provide the appropriate level of accommodation to offset negative 
shocks to the economy. 
I was looking back—and people have mentioned this—for example, we lowered the 
federal funds rate 5.5 percentage points, on average, during the nine recessions since the mid-
1950s, and clearly we no longer have this amount of policy space should an average recession 
July 30-31, 2019
43 of 329


 
 
 
occur.  And so the question that that leaves me with is, can unconventional policies compensate 
for the shortfalls in our conventional policy tools at the effective lower bound in a normal 
circumstance, not one that’s associated with a severe financial shock, just a normal, average 
encounter with the effective lower bound? 
Work throughout the System and the experience of other central banks convinced me that 
forward guidance and balance sheet policies were effective at providing some necessary stimulus 
during the financial crisis and its aftermath.  And, on balance, the evidence shows that these 
policies lowered long-term interest rates, depreciated the U.S. dollar, and, overall, led to more 
more-accommodative financial conditions.  These more accommodative financial conditions, in 
turn, helped support growth and inflation, although the exact magnitudes of those effects are still 
being debated. 
But still, these alternative policies are not a panacea, and I start by considering asset 
purchases.  My reading of the literature is that there is still quite a lot of disagreement about their 
effectiveness—more so, in fact, than was portrayed in the memo, because the memo was focused 
on the first episode of quantitative easing.  As we continue our discussions, it will be very 
important to keep the diversity of the views in mind about just how effective quantitative easing 
is.  It is just something that’s true—that if you talk to central bankers, quantitative easing looks 
very effective.  If you talk to financial economists in the academic sphere, they have a much 
more pessimistic or skeptical view of quantitative easing.  I think those are important things for 
us to consider or think about, as President Mester noted, with robustness checks. 
In addition, across studies, the effects of quantitative easing appear more modest during 
later rounds of asset purchases.  This is a topic that we have yet to take up.  So an understanding 
of what makes asset purchases effective will likely be quite relevant in the future when 
July 30-31, 2019
44 of 329


 
 
 
encounters with the effective lower bound come without the significant financial market 
dysfunctions we observed in the previous crisis.  And we will need a toolkit that works well in 
both situations:  the dire and the less dire. 
Now, in terms of forward guidance, our experience before, during, and following the 
financial crisis suggested it is useful in a wide range of circumstances.  As a result, providing 
additional forward guidance would be the first tool that I would go to in the vicinity of the 
effective lower bound before contemplating asset purchases.  But, more importantly, 
communications about future policy depend crucially on our credibility.  And, here, certain types 
of guidance are likely better than others. 
I was struck by President Mester’s and President Evans’ review of what was going on 
during the previous Committee deliberations.  It was really learning in real time using a variety 
of things.  But one way to think about that is, we’ve now experienced what worked better, time-
based, state-based, et cetera.  And we can basically try to surface some best practices and have 
them at the ready for an average encounter with the effective lower bound. 
When I looked over the information, the thing that came through was that state-based 
guidance was much easier to communicate—it provided clarity, enhanced transparency, 
visibility, and accountability.  But we ended up acknowledging that there’s only so much 
information we can regularly put into our policy statements.  We will naturally then be leaning 
more and becoming more dependent on our communications that surround those statements.  So 
that would be the Chair’s press conference and our own speeches and interviews that 
communicate the path of policy. 
And here—I wasn’t going to do it, but, since President Bullard brought it up—despite its 
flaws, I believe that the SEP has proven to be a useful component of that communication.  I’m 
July 30-31, 2019
45 of 329


 
 
 
glad we’re going to undertake a review of it, but I want to just highlight a few things that, to me, 
came through.  The SEP has been effective at conveying our perceptions, or the Committee’s 
perceptions when I wasn’t on it, of a decline in r* over the years.  The SEP was the main vehicle 
for really coalescing around the view that all of the Committee members saw a decline in r*, 
because the range of reported values of r* was coming down as well as the median.  This was 
particularly valuable early on to guide markets and explain the policy stance as they were trying 
to figure out—is the stance being driven by the reaction function or is it being driven by the 
fundamental variables?  It also has provided useful information about the evolution of growth, 
potential growth, and inflation forecasts, giving market participants more context to interpret the 
outlook for interest rates—again, allowing them to understand the reaction function versus the 
forecasts of fundamental variables. 
So, overall, forward guidance and balance sheet policies remain incomplete substitutes.  
Let me start over there.  These are both important tools.  They should be in the toolkit.  We’ve 
seen them be used effectively.  But they are incomplete substitutes—at least my reading of the 
evidence suggests—for the main policy tool we have at the effective lower bound.  And in this 
context, the review of our policy framework is imperative, and I’m looking forward to the 
analysis and discussions of alternative policies and strategies, including makeup strategies. 
Makeup strategies are no magic bullets and have costs and concerns attached to them; 
nonetheless they might help guide market expectations during effective lower bound episodes in 
a more systematic manner, particularly if we are able to establish the credibility of our policies in 
normal times. 
Let me say a few last things.  Although it is still early—for me, anyway—to weigh in on 
specific changes to the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy statement, 
July 30-31, 2019
46 of 329


 
 
 
I do really see a benefit in noting that we have effective lower bound risk, and that’s a risk the 
Committee will be attempting to balance.  I also think there is scope to discuss the uncertainty 
about r* and just the “star” variables in general.  We take that up on u* quite well.  But these are 
all the variables we use to calibrate policy, and being clear to the public that these are not 
“Truth” with a capital T and that there’s some uncertainty about their actual values, especially in 
the coming years, will be important. 
I want to concur with Vice Chair Williams that matching the goals that we state on one 
side of the statement to the strategies that we put forth, without getting to tactics—really, just 
getting from 100,000 feet to 30,000 feet, I think—will be incredibly important. 
And given that President Evans brought it up, one of the things that will be increasingly 
important for us to communicate is, how do we decide what full employment is if we don’t have 
it tethered to inflation?  I think one of the big lessons out in the Fed Listens tours has been—for 
me, anyway—that people are very aware that we don’t have runaway wage inflation or price 
inflation, and that we still talk about the relationship as if it’s holding or binding us.  So we 
might need another way to answer the question of how do you define full employment—is it 
allocative efficiency?  Are you worried about other components maybe pulling people out of 
school or housing prices going up, and those equilibriums aren’t correct?  Those are all questions 
we’ll have to grapple with if we’re going to effectively communicate about our policy stance. 
Finally, I want to just say—well, I have said that it’s a best practice to do this periodic 
review, and I really applaud this.  I think it’s critical.  I also think it’s important for us to 
acknowledge that our current approach to policy helped us navigate through these very rough 
waters of the financial crisis and subsequent to it.  And there I want to underscore that the 
anchoring of inflation expectations around 2 percent, which the Federal Reserve had worked for 
July 30-31, 2019
47 of 329


 
 
 
two decades to ensure, was really part of the reason we had the scope to do the exceptional 
policy accommodation that allowed us to do the best for our dual-mandate goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thanks for this thoughtful introduction to what I know will be an 
important process.  To the first two questions, I believe our existing tools and framework have 
served us well.  This seems especially true when you contrast our recovery with those of other 
countries.  Unlike most of them, we’re close, within decimal points, to both parts of our dual 
mandate.  The important constraints we’ve faced have been political—fiscal tightening in the 
early part of the decade, trade policy uncertainty more recently, and perceived limits on the size 
of our balance sheet. 
For sure, we’re closer to the effective lower bound, meaning we have less ammunition, if 
you will.  I don’t treat this as a shortcoming in our framework but just as a real descriptor of our 
economy these days.  And in contrast, our regulatory regime should help maintain a healthier 
banking system and stronger household balance sheets, suggesting that there should be less need 
to use extra-normal measures at the effective lower bound.  And new tools like forward guidance 
and quantitative easing are now understood and hopefully these tools will be more credible and 
can be used more forcefully. 
We’ll get to the topic of makeup strategies in September, but I would love to urge us to 
broaden our research, to test strategies that actually try not to do too much.  For example, it’s not 
at all clear we should be the only game in town, and this review gives us the perfect opportunity 
to raise, and perhaps make progress on building conviction on, the need to use fiscal levers and 
to address the structural barriers raised in the second memo. 
July 30-31, 2019
48 of 329


 
 
 
I also worry that strategies that increase our time at the effective lower bound run the risk 
of stabilizing lower inflation expectations, rather than returning them to our target.  That’s not 
inconsistent with the experience of Europe and Japan. 
Our job and our tools are imprecise.  To the third question, as I read the current Statement 
on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, I wonder if we shouldn’t acknowledge this 
imprecision recognizing the good points that President Bullard made on timing.  In particular, I’d 
suggest, like Presidents Rosengren and Mester, adopting a range for the inflation target like 
Canada’s done, explicitly using, as they do, multiple supporting core inflation metrics, not just 
one, and nuancing our tone.  As long as the Phillips curve remains flat, we will actually likely 
experience persistent small deviations from our inflation objective.  So perhaps we shouldn’t call 
out concern with small deviations as we currently do.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d also like to thank the staff, and I look 
forward to seeing what comes next.  So thank you.  I just want to add a few comments to what’s 
already been discussed.  A lot of what I wanted to say has already been discussed. 
But first, with respect to the questions, I think questions one and three are related.  So I’m 
going to comment on them in tandem.  For the most part, I think the framework has worked well 
in that it has provided the public with a clear understanding of the Committee’s objectives, 
enhanced our credibility, and made the policy process more efficient.  But, as others have said, in 
light of the current low interest rate environment and the associated asymmetries that 
environment engenders, I believe that the “balanced approach” language is not useful.  Because 
of the proximity to the lower bound, we are unlikely to hit our 2 percent inflation target, on 
average, if we do not commit to running inflation above 2 percent when we are away from the 
July 30-31, 2019
49 of 329


 
 
 
effective lower bound.  On average, inflation is likely to be at less than 2 percent, because 
inflation will likely run below target when we are close to the effective lower bound event. 
While perhaps not resulting in quantitatively large departures from a 2 percent average, I 
see no benefit to engraining inflation expectations lower than 2 percent.  So it may be worth 
communicating that the Committee is willing to tolerate, as others have said, inflation slightly 
above its target when away from the effective lower bound instead of using the balanced 
approach language. 
In a low interest rate world, the balanced approach could contribute to inflation 
persistently running below our 2 percent objective.  So approaches such as average inflation 
targeting and other makeup strategies would maybe help achieve our inflation objective.  But I 
am concerned that these approaches attempt to make a credible commitment that a future 
Committee will act in accordance with this policy, a commitment that I believe could be hard to 
make credible.  However, I am open to considering such policies if we could credibly deal with 
the credibility problem.  [Laughter]   
But I think that is, for me, the question for the next round of discussion.  In some ways, to 
me, it doesn’t matter whether it’s average inflation targeting or price-level targeting.  The real 
question is, can we come up with some mechanism that actually makes whatever we say we’re 
going to do credible?  So maybe just stating our willingness to run inflation above target when 
away from the effective lower bound would be enough, but I don’t know that.  I think that, for 
me, is the conversation I’d like to hear in the next round of this. 
With respect to the second question and taking the perspective of one who was on the 
sidelines when the recession occurred and watched our policy evolve in an extremely 
challenging environment, I think, on the whole, the Committee did an admirable job in avoiding 
July 30-31, 2019
50 of 329


 
 
 
economic outcomes that could have been a whole lot worse.  My take from the memo dealing 
with the asymmetric outcomes arising from our proximity to the effective lower bound is, as 
others have said, that we may wish to be even more aggressive in the future when we are at the 
effective lower bound.  In particular, we may wish to place more weight on the probability that 
“star” variables have fallen by a greater amount in recent years than we would in the absence of 
the effective lower bound constraint.  I would err on that side.  We would then have to be willing 
to accept slightly higher inflation when away from the lower bound. 
I also believe forward guidance is an important tool, and that asset purchases help 
communicate the Committee’s resolve to keep the policy accommodative for longer than normal.  
I think that is a credibility issue.  By engaging in asset purchases, we’re credibly signaling we’re 
going to be lower for longer.  And I think the public’s experience with asset purchases should 
only help add credibility should we have to take those extraordinary measures in the future.  
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to join others in thanking 
Governor Clarida for his leadership on this and the staff for what I thought was a helpful way to 
start thinking about this review.  Most of what I’ve heard around the table I’m going to shorthand 
in my own comments here, but I’ll say that I think the current framework has served us well.  
Particularly in that period of highly accommodative policy with unconventional measures, it 
would have appeared to help anchor inflation expectations and, I think, contributed to the 
stability of inflation during the expansion.  I think it also provided transparency about how we 
define our dual mandate. 
July 30-31, 2019
51 of 329


 
 
 
On the other hand, it’s been less clear that the framework has been up to the task during 
the recent period in which inflation has persistently fallen short of our 2 percent objective while 
at the same time the unemployment rate has fallen below estimates of its natural rate.  In these 
circumstances, the appropriate direction of policy has been unclear, and we struggle to explain 
what we mean by “a balanced approach” or “symmetry.” 
My own view has been that we should be willing to accept a small deviation of inflation 
below our longer-run objective when labor markets are tightening and economic growth is near 
trend.  The focus on a discrete number as our inflation objective, I felt, has placed too much 
attention on deviations from that number without framing the context for either tolerating such 
deviations or expecting the Committee to respond.  Of course, other members of the Committee 
interpret this differently.  So I think we have an opportunity to clarify this aspect of the 
framework. 
Along these lines, the staff memo argues that policymakers could have pursued greater 
accommodation within this current framework through increased use of forward guidance and 
balance sheet policy.  Outcomes realized by other countries makes this less clear, and I agree 
with President Mester and others that we should ensure a very robust assessment of the benefits 
and costs as we move forward.  Notwithstanding our limited experience with forward guidance 
and asset purchases, I recognize we may be faced with using these tools again should we return 
to the effective lower bound and deem additional accommodation is required. 
I think forward guidance about our policy rate path can be effective in shaping 
expectations and providing accommodation.  And though asset purchases have likely provided 
modest additional accommodation in some circumstances, they’ve also been fraught with 
July 30-31, 2019
52 of 329


 
 
 
undesirable side effects that threaten the Federal Reserve’s independence and make the 
subsequent removal of accommodation more challenging. 
Finally, another important aspect of the framework that I think is worth revisiting is the 
role of monetary policy and financial stability, as others have noted.  The quantitative 
surveillance assessments we take in provide relevant insight to the nature of vulnerabilities in the 
financial system, but what exactly is expected of monetary policy’s reactions to those 
vulnerabilities is an unresolved question, as others have raised today. 
Across these dimensions, it will be important to achieve clarity and transparency without 
adding to the length and complexity of this communication device.  That might argue for waiting 
until we complete our review before suggesting changes, and I look forward to these discussions.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d like to add my thanks to Governor Clarida 
and to the authors of the background memos for providing a comprehensive discussion of the 
evolving monetary policy framework and the events that led to its current form.  I found the 
materials very helpful and thought provoking. 
I’d like to make a few observations from the perspective of someone who is a relatively 
new participant in these discussions.  We know now that our approach to monetary policy over 
the past decade was evolving in parallel with important underlying structural changes in the 
economy, including a decline in the long-run rate of unemployment, a lower natural rate of 
interest, and a weaker relationship between resource utilization and inflation—that is, a flattening 
of the Phillips curve. 
July 30-31, 2019
53 of 329


 
 
 
Our understanding of these developments has been improved with the benefit of 
hindsight, and, as the staff memos show clearly, policymakers learned slowly about these 
structural transformations in the economy.  And we’re continuing to learn.  Our still-imperfect 
understanding of these ongoing structural changes and the potential for further changes to occur 
limit our ability to use our past experience to inform our decisions about the policy framework. 
Put more simply, the lessons of the recent past may not provide a clear roadmap for the 
future.  In particular, both the magnitude and persistence of these structural changes seem highly 
uncertain.  For instance, it seems possible that the factors that led to a reduction in the natural 
rate of interest could unwind in due course, and, if so, our focus on the implications of the 
effective lower bound may not be fully informed. 
That said, it’s worth recalling where we stand at the present time.  The unemployment 
rate is lower than at any time since the 1960s, inflation has remained relatively close to our target 
by historical standards, and the financial system looks to be resilient.  From that perspective at 
least, the current policy framework has served us quite well.  Of course, there’s always room for 
improvement, and to that end I see a couple areas where we might want to focus our efforts 
during this framework review. 
The first is our communications.  In the years since the previous recession, the monetary 
policy framework has evolved, albeit out of necessity, into a complex machine with multiple 
levers.  And while, as I said, this framework has been serving us quite well, the sheer complexity 
of it does pose challenges in terms of transparency, credibility, and ease of communication.  
Even if the economy continues to perform well for an extended period of time, I suspect that our 
policy communications will prove to be more complicated and difficult than before.  And 
July 30-31, 2019
54 of 329


 
 
 
because of that, we should use this opportunity to consider whether the various methods of 
communicating our actions are the best that they can be. 
For instance, our current policy communications include our formal statement, the press 
conference, the SEP, the release of the meeting minutes, as well as intermeeting interviews and 
commentary.  Although all of these communications provide important transparency around our 
decisions, I also see that the cacophony of our voices may obscure our message or lead to 
ambiguity or misinterpretation and unintended setting of expectations.  We should look for ways 
to convey our collective message more clearly while still fulfilling our obligation to the public to 
be transparent about our actions and reasoning. 
Second, and relatedly, I’d like to see the Committee reach a clearer consensus on what 
the goal of price stability specifically entails.  In the short time I’ve been on the FOMC, I have 
observed material differences around the table in our interpretations of the 2 percent inflation 
target.  Given a history of double-digit inflation in the not-so-distant past, should we consider 
inflation at its current expected level and the Board staff’s estimate of the underlying inflation 
rate to be basically a success in achieving our goal of price stability?  Or should we consider it a 
significant deviation from our target that we should work hard to address?  And does that answer 
depend on where we stand with regard to our maximum-employment goal? 
Inflation expectations, actual inflation, and, in fact, growth in employment can depend on 
what the public thinks our answers are to these questions.  And so I believe our policy 
framework could be strengthened if we could provide ourselves and the public with more clarity 
on these issues.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
July 30-31, 2019
55 of 329


 
 
 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to first thank the staff for a 
thoughtful, clear, and concise set of memos.  They help sharpen the issues nicely and are well 
designed to create a structured approach that can help us achieve an improved framework that we 
all understand and can support. 
In my view, the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy framework has been effective in 
helping the Committee keep the economy close to the targets the Committee established as 
benchmarks for defining the achievement of the dual mandate.  I actually think the essential 
feature of the framework is an overarching philosophy that the Federal Reserve will retain 
flexibility and optionality in trying to achieve its mandates.  As noted in the roadmap memo, this 
openness to change has been a hallmark of the Fed for decades, and this has set an important 
expectation among households, businesses, financial markets, and policymakers that the Fed 
stands ready to do what is necessary to stabilize the economy and move it closer to its longer-run 
targets. 
That said, there are some decisions that may have introduced problems.  The choice of a 
single-point-in-time numeric target for the inflation goal may have created an undesirable 
situation in which the target is being perceived as a ceiling.  And regarding the symmetry around 
the 2 percenttarget, I actually thought I knew what it was when I walked into the room 
[laughter], but now I think I may be confused.  What does it mean to try to deliver 2 percent, on 
average, over time if bygones are truly bygones? 
Now, I understand the appeal to symmetry, and I understand its importance for anchoring 
expectations.  But is our stated decision rule actually in conflict with this?  Or, to President 
Evans’s point, is it even real?  And I think we need to come to some clarity.  I think, Governor 
Bowman, you were talking to this issue as well. 
July 30-31, 2019
56 of 329


 
 
 
Similarly, the dot plot may be providing a false signal that the Committee has made some 
policy decisions, and these signals may now be a driver of market expectations for policy 
moving forward.  In addition, members of the Committee have, for some time, been arguing that 
forward guidance should be deployed with extreme care and caution because it can potentially 
harden expectations and lock the Committee into policy actions that may no longer be justified 
by the data.  Thinking is already under way on each of these issues, and there is value in 
developing a list of these potential problem areas and working to get to a good spot in each.   
Regarding policy at the effective lower bound, I think the memos make a compelling 
argument that first actions are important and so should be large and have the potential to be 
decisive.  This seems right to me.  Beyond that, my view is that the appropriate course of action 
will be very situation-specific—which makes it hard for me to be too explicit with 
recommendations. 
While reading the memos, a couple of issues came to mind.  First, in terms of making use 
of commitment mechanisms, are we comfortable to commit to calling out hard targets?  To the 
extent that we don’t call out numbers, then it might be more appropriate to call this a “suggestion 
mechanism.”  And I’m doubtful that this is as powerful as a harder commitment. 
The first memo made it very clear that the Committee’s past use of forward guidance was 
pretty modest and confined to thresholds that were not likely to cause many questions about the 
Committee’s commitment to hold steady until those thresholds were reached.  For example, it 
seems unlikely that anyone in December 2013 doubted that the Committee would choose to hold 
rates steady as long as the unemployment rate exceeded 6.5 percent. 
An unanswered question in my mind is whether the current framework can be enhanced 
or deployed to better effect.  If future statements like “We won’t raise rates until” are tied to 
July 30-31, 2019
57 of 329


 
 
 
thresholds that seems more of a stretch.  And, more importantly, should we be willing to do this?  
If not, that would seem to have some implications for future conversations about alternatives, 
which might also depend on strong forms of commitment. 
Second, I was intrigued by the assertion that monetary policy is asymmetric because the 
effective lower bound is binding.  To the extent that unconventional monetary policies are 
effective, then there is theoretically not a constraint at the lower bound of conventional policy. 
Now, I inferred from the review of our balance sheet policies that there is some 
skepticism among the staff that even much larger expansions would have been sufficient to fully 
offset effective-lower-bound constraints.  President Daly just recently touched on this and called 
unconventional and conventional policy tools “incomplete substitutes.”  The question I have is, 
do they need to be complete?  My thinking about the adequacy of the current framework will be 
importantly influenced by whether or not a sufficiently aggressive balance sheet policy can, in 
most circumstances, mitigate the effective-lower-bound constraint.  If the staff or others have 
more to say about this, I’d like to hear those opinions. 
I also think that the material on the interaction of the effective lower bound, the flat 
Phillips curve, and inflation expectations is informative.  I understand that the effective lower 
bound raises the stakes on a lot of other complications in the economic environment.  But I don’t 
think we should lose sight of the fact that the flat Phillips curve also creates problems for the 
case where inflation is above our target.  With a flat Phillips curve and not fully rational 
expectations, achieving our dual mandate begins to look really challenging if, for some reason, 
we find ourselves in a protracted period of inflation in excess of our longer-run goal.  We are 
right to focus on the effective lower bound, but our framework discussion needs to consider the 
full set of potential scenarios we might face. 
July 30-31, 2019
58 of 329


 
 
 
In thinking about the Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and 
its role in policy, I’d like to offer up this reflection.  I think the long-run statement’s greatest 
potential value is to articulate a reasonable guiding philosophy in an accessible way.  In this 
sense, it should not strive to be a fully articulated policy response function.  In this spirit, it could 
acknowledge the existence of the effective lower bound and note that unconventional policy 
actions will be deployed if necessary when the effective lower bound is reached.  Beyond that, I 
think it would be difficult to say a lot more than what is already in the statement. 
I recognize that a simple statement with such slight amendments will leave a lot of open 
questions that the Committee will have to face and make decisions on in reaching any specific 
policy decisions.  I could go into a thorough review of these here, but my staff strongly hinted 
that I was already running too long.  [Laughter]  So, instead, I will reach out to the staff so they 
are aware of some of the things that are on my mind. 
Suffice it to say that actual policy decisions will be dependent on the context at that time 
and will therefore need to be explained at that time in that light.  It would not be appropriate for 
the long-run statement to presuppose the context that the Committee will face or to pre-commit 
the Committee to a subset of actions, given the many contextual permutations that are possible. 
In sum, I view the long-run statement as more of a mission statement.  I don’t think there 
are obvious ways to change the statement to make it substantially more useful for understanding 
policy and our understanding of economic dynamics.  By contrast, the framework is firmly 
located in the space of contextualized thinking and can be communicated through speeches, the 
meeting statements, minutes, conferences, and policy actions.  Being clear on this distinction in 
function and form will be quite helpful for the Committee in executing policy moving forward. 
July 30-31, 2019
59 of 329


 
 
 
There are two other items that were raised today that I’d like to respond to.  First, I’m 
totally onboard with the thrust of President Rosengren’s last question on the sustainability of the 
attainment of our goals.  Sustainability is quite an important concept, as are concerns about it.  
Now, Vice Chair Williams offered one take on this, highlighting a distinction between 
structurally and cyclically low interest rates.  Is this right?  And is it the only way to think about 
this?  It would be good to have the staff’s thinking on this point. 
And then, finally, I want to thank President Evans for raising the issue of whether we 
really can run the economy extra “hot,” with minimal or relatively low cost.  There are many 
communities that need the kind of policy support that this strategy would reflect, and I have been 
to many of them during my time in this role.  Could it be that this institution has been wrong in 
its long-held position that monetary policy does not have distributional effects?  This is a 
question that we would be well served to try and answer.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the staff.  I thought 
the memos were very helpful.  I want to just highlight a few key points that I took away in 
reading the memos and then go through the questions. 
First, with regard to a low-r* environment, I thought the memos were very clear, and I 
agree with them—err on the side of being more accommodative rather than more restrictive and, 
if there’s a downturn, ease early and ease aggressively. 
Second, I think it’s now conventional wisdom that the Bank of Japan was too timid in 
response to low inflation.  I’m going to come back to that point. 
Third, I think it’s clear—to me, at least—that U.S. policy overall has been too tight in this 
recovery.  And I’m going to parse the recovery into two segments:  the period immediately 
July 30-31, 2019
60 of 329


 
 
 
following the Great Recession—the immediate recovery period—and the normalization period.  I 
think it’s been too tight in both periods. 
In the immediate aftermath of the Great Recession, I think that quantitative easing (QE) 
and forward guidance did help deal with the limitations of the effective lower bound, but only 
partially, and the persistence of the benefits was highly uncertain.  So I think, with the benefit of 
hindsight, policy in this period was too restrictive.  I think we now know that QE could have 
been larger and forward guidance provided with a firmer commitment.  There were reasonable 
fears at the time, because these were untested tools, of runaway inflation or what it would do to 
currencies.  This is with the benefit of hindsight that I’m saying this.  Those are not unreasonable 
fears, but I think that learning how it worked here and how it worked abroad means we could be 
more aggressive in a future downturn. 
In the more recent period, I think our normalization policy of raising the federal funds 
rate nine times was not actually called for by our current framework because of the symmetry of 
our inflation target.  We raised rates when inflation was always at or below our target.  Optimal 
policy, in my judgment, has inflation and the labor market in tension.  During this period, there 
was no tension, there was no tradeoff.  Inflation was low, and there was still slack in the labor 
market, so this was the “free lunch” zone.  So it was not the framework that limited us.  It was 
our own implementation of that framework that limited us. 
On the second question, I think our current symmetric framework can actually be very 
powerful with what we’ve learned, and we can accomplish a lot within our current framework.  
As I mentioned, I think we could use QE more aggressively in the future, and I think we should 
give forward guidance with a stronger commitment.  The symmetric inflation target provides us 
with a lot of room to make such commitments safely.  For example, I argued at the previous 
July 30-31, 2019
61 of 329


 
 
 
meeting—as I will, again, at this meeting—for us to make a commitment not to raise the federal 
funds rate until core inflation reaches our target on a sustained basis.  That isn’t calling for an 
explicit overshoot of the inflation target or a makeup of past inflation shortfalls, but it uses the 
breathing room provided by the symmetry of our target to make this strong commitment. 
In addition, I think we should consider using forward guidance away from the effective 
lower bound.  I think our goal should be to avoid the ELB in the first place.  If we wait to use 
forward guidance until once we have hit the ELB, it strikes me as a sign of weakness, not a sign 
of strength.  It means that we’re already out of policy space, so now we’re going to commit to 
staying in the very place we were trying to avoid.  It reminds me—like, if we’re driving down 
the road and we want to avoid driving into the ditch, but we end up in the ditch, and then we say, 
“Well, now I want to be in the ditch, and I’m going to stay in the ditch.”  It strikes me as not very 
credible.  We’re in the ditch because we can’t get out of the ditch.  To me, it’s much more 
powerful if we can make the forward guidance, make the commitment, when we still have 
traditional policy space and when we can demonstrate we’re the ones actually making decisions 
about the rate, not the economy driving us into the ditch—hence, my call for us using forward 
guidance today to commit not to raise rates until inflation returns to our target. 
On the third question, I’m going to leave discussion of makeup strategies for a future 
meeting, and I know the staff is working on memos.  The key consideration that I’m thinking of 
for any possible changes to our strategy statement is, how do we make it more likely a future 
Committee will follow through on the described strategies?  As I said earlier, it’s easy for us 
today to say the Bank of Japan was too timid.  I think we’re learning it’s harder to walk the walk 
ourselves.  Are there words we can write down that would make it more likely for a future 
Committee to actually walk the walk?  I don’t know.  I haven’t thought of them yet.  As the staff 
July 30-31, 2019
62 of 329


 
 
 
prepares its analysis of potential makeup strategies, I would welcome thoughts on why a future 
Committee would be more likely to stick to those strategies, which will call for low rates when 
inflation is at 2.5 percent or 3 percent, when we weren’t willing to keep rates low when inflation 
was below target in this recovery. 
And then, lastly, I just want to echo something President Evans said, which is us being 
explicit about the costs of very low unemployment.  I think it’s enormously important that we be 
precise, because why did we raise rates beginning in 2015?  Inflation was low.  We have a 
symmetric target, so if inflation climbed, the Committee would see it, and we would respond.  
The only real justification that I can come up with is that there were fears of nonlinearities in the 
inflation process, that all of a sudden we might get surprised or fall “behind the curve” and we 
would have to raise rates aggressively.  Well, three years later, at least so far, those nonlinearities 
have not emerged.  That doesn’t mean they can’t in the future, but so far they haven’t emerged.  
But now people are talking about more vague notions of imbalances.  And imbalances mean we 
can’t measure it.  It’s like, it could be this, it could be that. 
The costs to the labor market are real if we raise rates.  I think we owe it to the public to 
be very precise on what we’re trying to achieve, what these so-called imbalances really are.  
Otherwise, we’re going to find ourselves in the same trap in which we start raising rates for some 
ghost that we are afraid is out there.  We’re not going to bear the cost of that, but the public is.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  We’ve got a ways to go.  It’s lunchtime.  We’re going to 
break for lunch here, and we’re going to start again at 12:45 sharp.  Thank you. 
[Lunch recess] 
July 30-31, 2019
63 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  We’re going to start again.  There are a handful of additional 
interventions, and then we’ll have some time at the end of those if people want to just jump in 
and converse.  So, with that, over to you, President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, as others have said, to the staff 
and the Steering Committee for doing an excellent job and getting us off to a great start.  I’m just 
going to make four or five points, particularly because it’s after lunch.  And let me first say, as 
others have said, I think we’ve been very well served by taking a balanced approach to monetary 
policy, and what I mean by that is balancing reaching the employment objective with reaching 
our inflation objective.  I think this approach has involved a commitment to our goals but a 
flexibility in the tactics to achieve them, and I think, over the past 10 years, flexibility in a 
changing landscape has been very helpful. 
I also think that this approach has required patience, particularly in all of those years 
when the Committee’s policy rate was at or near zero, and an understanding that monetary policy 
acts with a lag.  And I think up until recently, and I’ll comment on that, this approach has been 
relatively well understood by the public, and the public has had a general understanding of the 
Committee’s reaction function.  And the reason I say it’s “up until recently” is because I think 
when this Committee was not achieving either of our dual objectives, it was at least 
directionally—we could disagree about the ferocity—but directionally, it was clear what actions 
we would take. 
I think it’s gotten complicated as we’ve approached achievement of our employment 
objective.  I know not everybody agrees we’ve achieved it, but, by and large, as we’ve gotten in 
the vicinity of achieving it but still run behind our inflation objective, I think it’s fair to say 
there’s been debate around this table that balance has tempered our decision on interest rates and 
July 30-31, 2019
64 of 329


 
 
 
on the balance sheet.  But I also think the public now has a less well-understood grasp of our 
framework.  And what do I mean by that?  If you went out and did a poll, I would guess, of 
our—I can speak for my own—regional boards, business people, and consumers, they would not 
think that inflation somewhat below target is dangerous.  I think there’s an opportunity in this 
framework review to go back out and better define price stability and better explain why 
undershooting this inflation objective is potentially risky.  But I don’t think it’s well understood 
right now. 
I think that this balanced approach—some would argue, I know, around this table—has 
restrained our ability to generate higher rates of inflation.  I think others, on the other hand, 
would argue it’s helped us avoid actions that might have led us to create excesses and 
imbalances.  And I think the debate we’re having, certainly at the Dallas Fed, is:  Once you’ve 
achieved full employment, are the benefits of a more singular focus on moving inflation to target 
or above target offset by the risks of creating undue excesses and imbalances?  And I think, as 
part of this framework review, that is something that we’re going to have to continue to debate. 
That is a particular concern to me, because we believe the structure of the U.S. economy 
has changed over the past several years.  Technology, technology-enabled disruption, and 
globalization have affected the pricing ability of businesses.  We’ve talked about this before.  
And I think more research needs to be done to understand how monetary policy is affecting the 
cyclical versus the structural elements of inflation.  How is monetary policy affecting headline 
inflation?  And I would like to see us, as part of this review, do more work on that. 
As to the second question here, I’m very open to exploring potential improvements to our 
framework and the use of forward guidance and balance sheet policies.  However, like others 
have mentioned, I’d be very concerned about commitments to specific tactics in the future ahead 
July 30-31, 2019
65 of 329


 
 
 
of knowing the specifics of any given situation.  I would be reluctant to make commitments that 
lead us to effectively or in part abandon our balanced approach unless we understand the 
specifics of the situation that we’re addressing.  And this is the commitment issue that many of 
you mentioned.  I’m sure we’ll wrestle with that. 
Another subject I’d like to see further discussed as part of the framework review is the 
role of balance sheet policies:  the role they play in depressing the level of market-determined 
interest rates and creating a flatter inverted yield curve, which I think has, in turn, limited the 
ability of this Committee to raise the federal funds rate and limited our ability to normalize 
monetary policy.  I’m particularly concerned about this as we seem to be struggling, and the 
world seems to be struggling, to reduce the size of the balance sheet when times are good.  And 
so, as we embark on discussions of the future use of balance sheet policies, I think discussion of 
their longer-term effects and limitations on the ability to normalize monetary policy later is 
worth examining. 
Last two comments.  As others have said, I do think, in our question three on our 
statement, I would like to see us more explicitly consider the risk of excesses and imbalances.  
And while you’re approaching those excesses and imbalances and creating them, it seems vague 
as to what the risks are until those imbalances spill over, and then it becomes more apparent and, 
I think, ultimately can jeopardize the ability of this Committee to achieve its dual-mandate 
objectives.  I guess, put more plainly—and I guess this is a sensitive discussion—in our efforts to 
extend the expansion, are we creating excesses and imbalances that ultimately imperil our ability 
to create sustainable full employment and price stability?  And this is something that President 
Rosengren touched on. 
July 30-31, 2019
66 of 329


 
 
 
I think we’d do well to acknowledge regularly that monetary policy is not the be-all and 
end-all of economic policy.  I know we know that here, but I think, for the public, it’s worth 
emphasizing that.  There’s a danger, I think, of central banks trying to do too much and being 
pressured to do too much and, by doing so, again, ultimately jeopardizing our ability to achieve 
our dual-mandate objectives.  In this context, I’m very mindful of the fact that the bulk of federal 
funds rate increases that got us to a target range of 2.25 percent to 2.5 percent came in anticipation 
of fiscal stimulus and in the aftermath of substantial fiscal stimulus.  And so I think we’d do well 
just acknowledging that we are a key part of economic policy, but there are other elements that 
are also critical that will allow us to achieve our dual-mandate objectives.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me add to the tsunami of gratitude to the 
staff for an informative set of memos and to Governor Clarida for organizing and leading the 
process.  As was highlighted in the introductory memo, obviously the Federal Reserve has 
changed its framework before, or we’d still be following the “real bills” doctrine, but not in this 
public and reflective and organized manner.  And though, at least in my mind, it remains to be 
seen what, if any, changes would result from this review, the process itself is a welcome 
innovation, and I think it’s already a success in terms of transparency and public accountability, 
and those are all good things. 
I thought both of the key memos this round were very relevant.  I was interested in what I 
saw as their somewhat divergent views on the effective lower bound.  Now, it’s entirely possible 
that the authors of the memos would say to me, along with T.S. Eliot, “That is not what I meant 
at all.  That is not it, at all.” 
July 30-31, 2019
67 of 329


 
 
 
But I took away from the first memo that, with balance sheet policies and forward 
guidance, the Fed was able to limit many of the negative effects of the ELB during the crisis.  I 
share what I think was President Bostic’s view that whether these tools were complete substitutes 
for traditional policy or not, they were pretty effective and, quite arguably, effective enough.  
Unemployment outcomes during the recovery were not much different than in other recoveries 
even with the constraint of the ELB.  Inflation remained relatively well anchored through the 
crisis and its aftermath, notwithstanding some more recent shortfalls.  But, in contrast to that 
view of the first memo, the simulations in the second memo are based on the assumption that the 
ELB is a binding constraint, with the FOMC unable to pursue unconventional policies.  For me, 
the question is, is that a reasonable assumption? 
In these simulations, it’s particularly important, for example, what the markets will 
expect the Committee to do.  My assumption is that the markets expect that we would engage in 
further balance sheet policies if we were to hit the ELB again.  And, more generally, how much 
of a constraint on monetary policy the ELB constitutes and what tools we might have to mitigate 
that constraint are essential building blocks in our discussion of frameworks. 
As a practical suggestion, I think our discussion of tools—that is, the policy options 
available when the short-term rate is constrained by the ELB—should be as robust and 
prominent as our discussion of alternative frameworks.  And I see several reasons for 
emphasizing, even making a priority of, a discussion of tools.  First, a proper understanding of 
the policy constraints associated with the ELB is essential to evaluating the alternative 
frameworks, such as average inflation targeting that we’re likely to be discussing.  Model 
simulations that are based on a binding ELB constraint aren’t very informative if they rule out 
July 30-31, 2019
68 of 329


 
 
 
balance sheet policies that the Committee is likely to take and that the market is likely to expect 
us to take if there were a severe downturn. 
Second, in the current environment of a low r* and low inflation, it’s unlikely that any 
change in the framework would keep us off of the ELB into perpetuity.  Alternative frameworks 
might decrease the chance of hitting the ELB but, in our current environment, probably not by 
much.  So I view an examination of our toolkit of policy options at the ELB to be a high priority. 
And, third, I worry a bit about overemphasizing the ELB as we communicate our 
rationale for alternative frameworks.  The ELB is a constraint on one of our policy tools:  the 
short-term interest rate.  A discussion of our broader toolkit might be another way of lowering 
ELB-related risk by reassuring the public that we have more than one tool in our toolbox, and 
that the more frequent occurrence of the ELB—that, in fact, I think we would all expect in the 
current environment—need not result in much worse macroeconomic outcomes. 
So just a word on balance sheet policies.  I agree with the memo’s conclusion that many 
of the fears that the policies provoked and that likely constrained their use during the crisis did 
not come to pass—not in the United States and not in the other jurisdictions around the world in 
which they were employed.  And as President Kashkari and a couple of others around the table 
have said, with the costs now better understood, these policies are likely to be used more 
effectively during the next downturn. 
Now, I fully realize that I am generally viewed as hanging with the crowd that has a 
quasi-religious aversion to balance sheet policies in the same way that some view a black mass—
possibly effective, but dangerous for exactly that reason.  [Laughter]  But I’m a friendly heretic 
on that point.  In any event, I believe that facts are facts, and the staff’s work is, I think, a useful 
and persuasive statement of the facts.  And, again, as to the questions that Presidents Mester and 
July 30-31, 2019
69 of 329


 
 
 
Daly and others have emphasized about the complete effectiveness of those policies, I’d again 
emphasize that I’m inclined along the lines that President Bostic expressed of wondering 
whether they are, nonetheless, effective enough. 
I’d add that I don’t think there’s any inconsistency in supporting the use of the balance 
sheet for the conduct of monetary policy while simultaneously arguing for the balance sheet to 
be kept at its smallest possible size.  One reason I’ve advocated taking measures to shrink excess 
reserves rather aggressively is that I think it’s important to show that expansions in the balance 
sheet can eventually be reversed.  And knowing that use of the balance sheet as a policy tool 
doesn’t necessitate a permanent ratcheting-up of the balance sheet is likely to increase support 
for its use.  I think we would all agree with that. 
Finally—well, maybe not quite “finally,” because I’ve got one paragraph after this, but—
so, “now” [laughter], a comment on our symmetric inflation target, which I hadn’t really 
intended to raise, but it’s principally for the benefit of the minutes, given some of the other 
discussions, because all of you who have heard me say this before, I think, know where I’d 
stand.  I believe that symmetry around a range means—and if, contrary to Noah Webster and 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, it doesn’t mean, then our policy ought to be, and we should find a word to 
reflect it—that we are indifferent to modest misses in either direction from a reasonable target.  
If our inflation target is 2 percent and inflation runs at 2.2 percent or 2.3 percent for the next 
20 years in a row, I will sleep easily at night, and I can turn to finding other ways to fill the hours 
of the day.  And if it runs at 1.7 percent or 1.8 percent for 20 years, I will do the same.  Our 
measurement of inflation is not precise enough, our understanding of macroeconomic 
relationships is not firm enough, our tools are not surgical enough, and the political economy in 
July 30-31, 2019
70 of 329


 
 
 
which we operate is not constant enough to make more anally compulsive inflation targeting 
either effective or necessary. 
Finally, on the question of how we might adjust the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy in response to our uncertainty over the structure of the economy, one 
aspect of uncertainty that’s particularly important—again, that many have mentioned—is that 
associated with u*.  Given this uncertainty, it would be and it clearly has been difficult to 
motivate policy to hit any particular u* target, and perhaps that difficulty calls for a 
reexamination of the statement language on u* to make it clearer that we are unlikely to tighten 
simply because u falls below u*.  Of course, that raises difficult questions of how we would 
respond if u were to rise above our estimates of u*.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I welcome this opportunity to continue our 
discussion of the monetary policy framework, starting from where we left off just one year ago.  
I appreciate the leadership of Governor Clarida, as well as the excellent papers by the staff today, 
the Chicago conference, and Fed Listens discussions. 
It is valuable to start by updating the foundational assumptions that informed the current 
policy framework.  Three conditioning assumptions have formed my view of the new normal, 
which has informed my policy views over the past four years.  First, we are likely to see more 
frequent and prolonged episodes when the federal funds rate is pinned at its lower bound.  In 
part, this reflects an equilibrium rate that’s much lower than in the decades before the crisis.  We 
can see the evolution of that key conditioning assumption in the sharp decline in the SEP median 
longer-run federal funds rate, which decreased from 4.25 percent in January of 2012, similar to the 
July 30-31, 2019
71 of 329


 
 
 
average value of 4.5 percent in previous decades, to our most recent estimate that’s closer to the 
2.5 percent level. 
Considering that the FOMC has cut the federal funds rate, on average, about 450 basis 
points in response to recessions over the past five decades, current estimates indeed suggest the 
buffer is much smaller at only half that amount.  That is a large loss of policy space and could be 
expected to increase the frequency or length of periods when the policy rate is pinned at the 
lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target.  In turn, those frequent or 
extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation 
expectations.  This self-reinforcing downward spiral is extremely dangerous, as we see 
elsewhere.  Furthermore, if recent experience is any guide, fiscal policy cannot be counted on to 
play a reliably countercyclical role. 
Second, underlying trend inflation is mired somewhat below 2 percent.  This conclusion 
emerges from the use of a variety of statistical filtering methods and is reinforced by a variety of 
survey measures of expectations, as well as market measures of inflation compensation. 
Third, the sensitivity of price inflation to labor resource utilization is very low—or, put 
more simply, the Phillips curve is inert.  A flat Phillips curve has important advantages.  The 
labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers who may otherwise be sidelined back 
into productive employment without accelerating inflation.  On the other hand, it also makes it 
harder to boost inflation during expansion and to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on a 
sustainable basis.  And that, in turn, could further compress conventional policy space in a 
negative spiral. 
In addition, as we have seen, it means the traditional relationship between inflation and 
unemployment can be a very misleading guide for monetary policy, and it raises questions about 
July 30-31, 2019
72 of 329


 
 
 
the “balanced approach” discussion in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy 
Strategy.  It’s the combination of these three developments together and their implications that 
need to be considered in our review of the framework. 
With that as a backdrop, it does make sense to review the effectiveness of our policy 
framework in light of the contours of today’s new normal, which is considering both the reaction 
function that guides policy over the cycle—described in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy—as well as the adequacy of policy space to buffer the economy from 
negative shocks when conventional policy space alone is inadequate. 
The staff memos focus on our tools as they have been used in the past and, in that sense, 
pick up naturally where last July’s discussion left off.  They raise the possibility that more could 
be done with forward guidance, even without going so far as to embrace inflation overshooting.  
Arguably, the most innovative use of forward guidance over the past decade was the adoption of 
an unemployment threshold in late 2012.  Under that policy, the Committee pledged not to raise 
the funds rate at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6.5 percent.  In the end, 
the Committee didn’t raise the funds rate until unemployment had fallen to 5 percent and, in fact, 
didn’t raise the funds rate again after that until it had reached 4.75 percent.  I think this episode, 
more than anything else, illustrates the risk of relying on an unemployment target alone when 
estimates of maximum employment change with the contours of the economy, and the 
conventional implications for inflation through the Phillips curve are inoperative.  In short, even 
when employing and then relaxing threshold-based forward guidance, we lifted off too early 
because of faulty assumptions based on historical relationships. 
Our discussion last year suggested that a threshold based on inflation might be effective 
at stabilizing an economy with limited conventional policy space.  Even without formally 
July 30-31, 2019
73 of 329


 
 
 
committing to overshooting or a makeup policy, it is likely, given the usual lags in the economy, 
a 2 percent inflation threshold would, in fact, lead to some overshooting. 
All told, even under very strong assumptions about the predictability and credibility of an 
inflation threshold policy combining asset purchases with forward guidance, the combined 
effects of these policies, at least in the analysis, turned out to be less than satisfactory.  For this 
reason, it’s important to cast our net more broadly as we consider the range of options for dealing 
with the loss of conventional policy space. 
I look forward to future consideration of a range of policies—in particular, policies that 
seek to make up for a protracted shortfall from our objectives during a lower-bound episode.  
The literature suggests that such policies can be particularly effective in addressing the lower-
bound constraint.  Although they sound very appealing on their face, they have not yet been 
implemented in practice, and there is some skepticism that any central bank would, in fact, prove 
able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that 
inflation might accelerate and inflation expectations might rise too high.  We’re going to need to 
closely analyze the requirements for credibility to see whether such policies in fact could be 
implemented in practice. 
Beyond that, to the extent that there is likely to be an enduring compression in the 
average size of our monetary policy buffer driven by an enduringly lower neutral range, it would 
seem irresponsible not to at least consider the pros and cons of raising the inflation target to 
compensate by a modest amount.  I wouldn’t be inclined to consider a move to a 4 percent target, 
for instance, but I think it would be valuable to discuss the risks and advantages of considering a 
move to a more modest and perhaps more achievable range, perhaps 2.5 to 3 percent. 
July 30-31, 2019
74 of 329


 
 
 
In fact, average inflation targeting may not look very different from a modest increase in 
the inflation target to most households and businesses of the sorts that were represented in our 
Fed Listens panels.  For instance, if we were in an average inflation-targeting framework today, 
how would we be talking about our inflation goal?  Wouldn’t we be saying that we’re targeting 
average inflation of 2.5 percent over the next five years in order to achieve our long-run average 
inflation goal of 2 percent after many years with inflation averaging around 1.5 percent?  In this 
case, after several years of successfully achieving inflation of 2.5 percent in order to make up for 
those past misses, we might want to simply lock in the modest increase in our buffer in a policy 
that might be akin to opportunistic reflation. 
In addition, the staff analysis of last year demonstrates that threshold-based asset 
purchases can help improve the effectiveness of monetary policy to the extent that the public 
anticipates asset purchases will be triggered as soon as the lower bound is hit and maintained in 
an open-ended commitment until the thresholds are achieved.  To me, this point is really 
important.  If, instead—as has been the case in every advanced economy that has employed some 
form of asset purchases—there is uncertainty about the conditions that might trigger those 
purchases and how long they would be sustained, this undercuts the efficacy of those policies.  
And long delays in the deployment of asset purchases, perhaps because of perceived political 
risks, add to the public’s uncertainty. 
To avoid the lumpiness and resulting uncertainty associated with starting and stopping 
balance sheet policies, I remain interested in exploring policies that could extend quasi-
conventional policy space more smoothly and continuously by focusing on interest rates, rather 
than quantities.  In particular, once the overnight policy rate reaches the effective lower bound, 
we could push rates down by progressively moving out along the yield curve in the one-to-two-
July 30-31, 2019
75 of 329


 
 
 
year horizon.  Such progressive yield curve policies would keep the focus on our traditional 
tool—interest rates rather than quantities—and could be initiated and wound down smoothly and 
in a way that reinforces forward guidance.  Of course, in the event of a very severe financial 
shock, such a policy could be augmented with limited purchases at the 10-year horizon, but I 
would anticipate those would be more limited in scope and duration. 
Finally, the staff asked us to consider ways in which the Statement on Longer-Run Goals 
and Monetary Policy Strategy should be modified.  There is an important sense in which this 
discussion is premature.  Nevertheless, I’ll give a few quick answers.  Yes, the statement needs 
to be updated for the key features of the “new normal.”  Yes, we need to address the nexus 
between financial stability and monetary policy and, in turn, between monetary macroprudential 
and structural policies.  But, finally, changes to the statement will be necessary but not sufficient.  
Just as the Committee has augmented the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy 
Strategy with principles and plans for deploying various policy tools, so too it may be desirable 
to indicate to the public in peacetime what our actions might be in the event of a future recession. 
Indeed, the policy review presents a very nice opportunity to sketch such plans with 
reduced risk that doing so might be signaling concerns about elevated recession risk.  Laying out 
our plans in general terms for, for instance, average inflation targeting or moving out the yield 
curve well ahead of time may prove useful in reducing uncertainty about what our actions would 
be.  And that reduced uncertainty, in turn, could help limit some of the decline in household and 
business sentiment that typically occurs during a recession, perhaps reducing the severity of the 
downturn.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks to the staff for a great analysis and memos 
and presentations, and thanks to everyone for a really excellent round of comments.  I’ll offer 
July 30-31, 2019
76 of 329


 
 
 
just a few thoughts here as we begin this series of meetings.  First, for me, the proximity to the 
effective lower bound and the implications of that together represent the preeminent challenge to 
monetary policy in this era.  For starters, we’ll find it challenging to respond to even a typically 
sized downturn.  The downward drift in the neutral rate limits space for conventional policy, and 
the efficacy of what we have been calling “unconventional tools” is, as we go forward, an open 
question. 
My own view is that quantitative easing (QE) and forward guidance provide a 
meaningful support for demand, but they are not perfect substitutes for traditional tools.  It’s also 
possible that future rounds of QE will be less effective than in the past, especially if Treasury 
yields’ term premiums remain compressed.  A lot of the studies that show high efficacy of QE 
depend on QE1, which was a surprise.  If policy is really about moving expectations, I think 
there are real questions about the efficacy of it, which is not to say that we won’t use it 
aggressively. 
In addition, the flat Phillips curve makes running a “hot” economy less effective at 
boosting inflation.  Inflation shortfalls that persist even in a robust economy could lead to a 
difficult-to-arrest downward shift in inflation expectations, especially if a recession hits us before 
we achieve our target.  Core inflation has been running below 2 percent for a long time.  If the 
economy falls into another drawn-out ELB episode with dulled tools and a flat Phillips curve, 
inflation expectations could easily slide further, and the vicious cycle will continue.  We may 
find ourselves on the disinflationary road a couple of decades behind Japan and a few years 
behind the euro area—a road that is hard to exit.  Better to fight now to avoid getting on it in the 
first place. 
July 30-31, 2019
77 of 329


 
 
 
The U.S. experience proves that ELB episodes are not necessarily economic black holes 
from which there is no escape, but the climb out can be prolonged and painful.  More broadly, in 
this world, I suspect that the consequences of overly restrictive policy are now more painful and 
persistent than those of overaccommodation.  That was obviously not the case during previous 
eras, such as the Great Inflation, and I’m not under the illusion that this is a permanent state of 
affairs or that it is not possible that pursuing this insight beyond its useful boundaries could cause 
trouble. 
As some of you have pointed out, there’s also a risk that using monetary policy to push 
sufficiently hard on labor markets to lift inflation could encourage destabilizing excesses in 
financial markets.  We have nonmonetary policy tools to address financial stability:  among 
them, high through-the-cycle capital and liquidity requirements and stress tests.  And I think 
most circumstances warrant relying on those more targeted tools before putting the brakes on the 
real economy. 
Uncertainty about key values, such as u* and r*, and about the slope of the Phillips curve 
has always presented challenges for the conduct of monetary policy.  But proximity to the ELB 
imbues old issues with greater significance.  That is why now is the perfect time to be conducting 
a review.  As Governor Clarida highlighted, we’re going to examine the tools deployed over the 
years, the “bygones are bygones” approach that we have used, and the Statement on Longer-Run 
Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  That document was agreed to in January 2012, a few 
months before I joined the Board and just after many fierce battles over the language.  I 
witnessed and took part in a few of the final skirmishes in my early years.  And, since then, 
peace broke out.  Not much changed.  We tend to vote on it unchanged each year.  And I’ll just 
say that those battles, for me, helped focus attention on the key issues that are embedded in the 
July 30-31, 2019
78 of 329


 
 
 
document, and I find that I’ve returned to it time and time again over the years to help me think 
about our framework.  And I think those of us who weren’t here then will find that it’s quite a 
useful document.  I think fixing the longer-run statement—or amending it, if you will—is 
necessary.  I’m not under any illusion that it would be sufficient. 
Regarding our framework, clearly, it did serve us well.  Equally clearly, we now know 
that we could have been, in hindsight, much more aggressive.  And I think we will be in the 
future.  I think the idea that acting preemptively to gathering weaknesses is a good idea, and I 
think we’ll do that.  But that doesn’t in any way, to me, undercut the broader point that this new 
world that we’ve been living in now—really, for 10 years of low r*, low u*, flat Phillips curve, a 
proximate effective lower bound, centrality of inflation expectations, usefulness of 
unconventional monetary policy, the financial stability implications of that—all of those are, 
effectively, new, since 10 years ago, and we haven’t really grappled with them.  That’s why this 
is such a great time for us to be doing this, a decade after the crisis, and doing everything we can 
to formally incorporate that into our framework. 
My last thought would be, I think the process of thinking about these changes and then 
implementing them needs to be careful, deliberate, and patient.  I think this is not something that 
we should be working to a hard deadline on.  Think about how long it took for inflation targeting 
around the world to become the norm.  And I think we found this over the years on many issues, 
when we take our time and let issues steep a little bit and come back to them again.  I’m not 
suggesting we spend the rest of our careers on this [laughter]—it begins to sound that way—but I 
don’t see next January as a hard stop.  I see us getting this done when it’s ready to be done. 
July 30-31, 2019
79 of 329


 
 
 
And, with that, I will stop.  As I mentioned earlier, if anyone would like to offer 
comments or reactions to this broad set of topics, we’ll have a time of just open comment.  
President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  I just had two things that maybe are “asks” of the staff or for consideration 
for further discussion.  The first one is on this notion of an “incomplete substitute.”  President 
Bostic and Governor Quarles both picked up on this idea; you never know what’s going to be 
picked up in your statement.  So I don’t think there’s a big disagreement between us that an 
incomplete substitute is still a good tool.  The question that isn’t really covered in the memos that 
we saw so far is, how incomplete are they going to be?  And so even as the Chair just mentioned, 
even when you look at the episodes after the financial crisis, there’s quite a bit of difference both 
in how researchers interpret any one QE movement, but also how effective they were as we got 
out of dysfunctional financial markets and into more functioning financial markets.  So I think 
additional work on that—or at least a survey article or survey memo that talks about those 
differences that we’ve talked about before—would be helpful, because then we know what we’re 
deciding on.  How incomplete are the tools? 
The second thing I want to ask about is in this discussion of target ranges for inflation 
where you’re thinking about 1.5 percent to 2.5 percent.  Vice Chair Williams started his remarks 
by saying that we’re going to be in a situation in which the bias is all in the negative shocks to 
inflation, and you could end up with average inflation running lower simply because we’re close 
to the ELB.  If that’s the case, and we’re in a 1.5 to 2.5 percent range—I was trying to parse this 
out—it’s a little bit like we’re deciding that it’s okay to have a buffer that’s 50 basis points lower 
than the one we decided on.  That leads me to wonder, could we go back—I know we’re not 
talking about changing 2 percent—and recirculate some of the memos and things that were used 
July 30-31, 2019
80 of 329


 
 
 
in the deliberations when 2 percent was decided as the sufficient buffer, and there was an 
unwillingness to go to 1.5 percent because we thought that 1.5 was just too dangerously close to 
1 percent.  I think that’s part of level setting, especially for people who haven’t been on the 
Committee and been part of that discussion.  And if those values have changed, we should know 
it, but if they haven’t changed, it’s also good to reaffirm them. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  It was a really interesting discussion.  I think one of the challenges 
is, there’s a disagreement about the current framework, and until we get agreement on the current 
framework, it’s hard to talk about the future framework.  What do I mean by that?  I’d say the 
people closest to the Federal Reserve flag are emphasizing the word “symmetric” in our 
statement, and the people closest to the map—this is a gross generalization—are emphasizing the 
words “balanced approach” in what they’re thinking. 
Let me give a concrete example of how that would manifest itself.  Those that emphasize 
“symmetric”—let’s say that you know with certainty that there’s no financial stability concerns 
whatsoever, and one year from now you’re going to be at 1.9 percent on both core and total 
inflation, but you’re going to be slightly below what you think the natural rate of unemployment 
is going to be.  Those people closest to the flag seem to think that “symmetric” means that, in 
that case, we might want to ease, because we’re below 2 percent.  Those people closest to the 
map seem to say, “Well, inflation and unemployment are basically balanced and close to their 
target.  We don’t have much of a need to do something.” 
That challenge carries itself when we go forward.  To give an example, a bunch of the 
people who are closest to the map thought that a range might make sense.  Now, different people 
in this group probably have a different concept of what that range means.  Jim Bullard, for 
July 30-31, 2019
81 of 329


 
 
 
example, highlighted that he thought it means we would focus on 1.5 percent.  If it’s 1.5 to 2.5 
percent, and the way you thought about it was when you’re at or near full employment, you 
actually want to be between 2 and 2.5 percent, realizing that when you’re at the lower bound it’s 
going to be hard to prevent inflation from drifting down, and you’re probably going to be 1.5 to 2 
percent.  And so a range actually gives you the flexibility to try to, on average, get to 2 percent 
without having some of the time inconsistency problems that would otherwise occur.  But 
whether you think that’s a good idea or a bad idea is, in part, dependent on whether you are a 
“symmetric” person or a “balanced approach” person. 
So I do think maybe thinking a little bit more about the current framework would help us 
think about what that future framework ought to be, because we do get different policy 
conclusions from the exact same kind of set of facts with the current framework.  I thought that 
might engender a few hands.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR POWELL.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Well, I think that’s a very constructive comment, but I think 
our current Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is inconsistent.  I 
think there’s a logical breakdown that we currently have, and that’s why the statement you just 
made couldn’t be true, because some people are reading the right column and some people are 
reading the left column.  I think it’s a logical kind of a problem, and it’s because of the lower 
bound.  So I don’t think it’s about choosing which side.  It’s that there’s an inconsistency in the 
statement. 
We had the range debate before, a long time ago.  I do think, when you talk about time 
inconsistency, it isn’t solved by changing the words.  It’s solved by the willingness of those who 
say what you just said—that, in good times, we’re going to shoot for inflation at the high end of 
July 30-31, 2019
82 of 329


 
 
 
the range.  The Committee would carry out policy consistent with that and do that, and then 
knowing that when you’re in recession or periods of negative shocks, there could be the low end. 
I think that’s really the debate we’re having.  Would this Committee commit to shooting 
for the upper end of the range during expansion, like in a time, conceptually, like today?  And I 
think that’s really what we’re talking about.  Calling it a “range” doesn’t solve that problem.  
What we have to have is very clear communication amongst ourselves and externally that that’s 
what we would mean by the range, and that’s the same, in ways, as some versions of average 
inflation targeting. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  I’m happy to weigh in on this a little bit.  I think the range debate 
comes down to the question of whether the range indicates a range of inaction.  So if you listen 
to Governor Quarles very articulately saying, “Well, you can’t measure inflation that closely 
anyway, so why are you trying to split hairs over a tenth on the inflation range?” then I’m very 
sympathetic with it, and I think everybody would be very sympathetic with it.  But if you have a 
range, everyone’s going to know what the midpoint in the range is.  So are you saying you’re not 
going to take any action if inflation is in that range, or are you saying you’re going to take some 
kind of mitigated action or lighter action, which I think is implicit? 
But you’ve already got quadratic loss functions there.  So you’re probably not going to do 
very much at 1.9 percent, whereas when you’re at 1.4 percent, more alarm bells might go off.  Or 
at 2.6 percent, alarm bells might go off, and you say, “We’ve got to get more aggressive here.”  
At least my reading of the literature on this is that maybe it doesn’t help that much to say things 
are in a range versus a point, because you’ve got these issues about what you would do inside the 
range, just like John was saying. 
July 30-31, 2019
83 of 329


 
 
 
To me, the biggest issue is, is the Committee or are any of these central banks around the 
world going to be complacent about low inflation in an environment in which these countries 
have gotten stuck in these low interest rate, low-inflation worlds?  And I think there was a 
time—I think there were people on this Committee who felt that the only goal was to keep 
inflation low, and that inflation’s a teapot—the only problem that you could ever face is that the 
teapot boils over, and so the only thing that you’re trying to prevent is inflation from getting high 
and variable the way it was in the 1970s. 
And that informed a lot of central bank thinking for decades, but, boy, the past decade 
has turned that around.  And as Chair Powell just said, the problem of our times is that there’s a 
problem on the low side as well, and you can’t be complacent about low inflation or you might 
get stuck in this trap.  So I guess that’s a long-winded answer, but I don’t think that the “zones” 
argument is going to solve this problem.  I think it’s very much a commitment issue, like John 
has said. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  I was really struck by the point that President Evans made on, what if 
you just assume there’s no Phillips curve?  What do we do?  And part of the reason I was struck 
by that is, I do think there’s an implicit assumption in a lot of the strategies that if we go low 
with the path of interest rates, it’ll drive inflation higher.  And you could argue that—I’ll take 
Europe, but maybe Japan—they’ve gone low, really low, for a long time and haven’t driven 
inflation higher.  So I’d love to find some way, as we do this conversation, just to explore those 
stories in a little more depth, because I know it was a thought experiment, but it’s a really 
powerful thought experiment, and I think we ought to think about what we’re doing in the 
context of that experiment. 
July 30-31, 2019
84 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Let me add, I was also struck by that and by President Bullard’s 
comment that the effective lower bound can be a bit of a roach motel.  It’s an unstable 
equilibrium, in a way—after an amount of time, it just affects thinking.  More thinking on that 
front.  Any other comments in this impromptu segment?  [No response]  Okay, well— 
MR. BULLARD.  I’m sorry, I do.  I don’t know if we could follow up a little bit on 
Governor Brainard’s comment that we have our Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary 
Policy Strategy, but then at times we have supplemented that with other types of statements.  
One was exit principles, and then revisions to the exit principles.  Could we do something like 
that?  And might that be a good way forward here, to provide a better summary of all of the 
thinking of the Committee and maybe better guide expectations about what we would do in a 
future downturn? 
I’m not saying I know the pros and cons of this, but is this something we could think 
about and consider?  Because otherwise we’re going to get down to the Statement of Longer-Run 
Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, as I was saying in my comments, and it’s just going to be a 
few words or a few phrases, and that seems like a very, very tough order—to summarize a huge 
body of literature and then bring it down to just a few words in a long-run statement. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Yes, I agree with that.  I actually think we should rename this 
document—take the word “strategy” out and put “philosophy” in.  “Strategy” is super 
complicated.  It’s got a lot of detail.  It’s got a lot of context.  I thought the goal of this was to 
present something that was easily accessible for regular people—it wasn’t going to get their eyes 
to glaze over in all of the details.  I think the approach taken, the internal conflicts 
notwithstanding, is the right approach for that type of document.  And then it may be that we 
July 30-31, 2019
85 of 329


 
 
 
have a separate series of documents that detail each of the tools that we might use and then have 
another section where they interact and all that kind of stuff.  I think that gives us the space and 
the latitude to be as thorough as we need to be to try to articulate what we’re doing in a 
clear way. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  First off, I’d like to thank President Rosengren for explaining why the 
flags are so important.  [Laughter]  More insightful comments I wish I had made myself. 
I would like to say that I’d like to live in the world that Governor Quarles described.  I 
would have no difficulty with either of those situations either or even flipping a coin between 
whether or not it’s 1.7 percent inflation for the next 20 years or 2.3 percent for the next 20 years. 
What worries me and, I think, is surrounding so much of our conversation is, what 
happens in the event where something pushes us into the other situation?  And the way I think 
about this struggle is, how do we demonstrate to the public how we will behave during some 
future period that we have not collectively, as a Committee, acted upon?  And I think previous 
Committees struggled with that in 2010 and 2011 and 2012, and that’s when we find out what 
we’re really thinking about, to the extent that we can lay the groundwork to make those decisions 
better or do that.  But it’s not the 1.9 percent inflation per se that bothers me so much, it’s the 
implication for our future actions.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Just on those points—and it may be heresy to say, but—I think the 
public understands the risk of high inflation, I think the public understands why not being at full 
employment is bad—they understand why both of those are negative.  I don’t think the public 
understands why 1.6 percent inflation is dangerous versus 2 percent.  I think we may need to do 
July 30-31, 2019
86 of 329


 
 
 
more.  I think we understand, around this table—although there are different points of view—the 
risks.  I think we’ve lost people, maybe a little bit more than we realize, explaining the risks of 
these persistent misses on the low side—I think we can do more to explain it, but I think we’d be 
well served to explain it as we roll out this new framework and explain our reaction function, 
because I think we’ve lost people a little bit on that.  That’s my observation. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay, great.  Thanks, everyone, for a great round of comments.  All 
right.  And now to the Desk presentation.  Lorie, over to you. 
MS. LOGAN.3  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the handout titled 
“Material for Briefing on Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” 
Over the intermeeting period, financial market developments reflected shifts in 
expectations for monetary policy in response to central bank communications, trade 
developments, and U.S. economic data that were seen as pointing to continued 
moderate growth and low but stable inflation.  As shown in the shaded area in 
panel 1, U.S. equity prices rose over the period to reach new nominal highs.  Policy-
sensitive interest rates, with the two-year Treasury yield shown here, experienced 
some volatility but, on net, were little changed. 
In my briefing I’ll explore three questions, outlined in panel 2, before turning to a 
discussion of money markets.  First, how have market participants’ expectations for 
monetary policy evolved in the United States and abroad?  Second, how have those 
shifts in policy expectations affected financial conditions?  And, third, how have 
market participants’ views of global risks changed? 
Starting with the first question, since the previous meeting, there has been a 
significant convergence in policy rate expectations.  Panels 3 and 4 depict the 
distribution of Desk survey respondents’ modal forecasts for the target rate following 
this meeting and at the end of this year.  In panel 3, the blue bars show that nearly all 
respondents from the July Desk surveys have a modal forecast of a 25 basis point cut 
at this meeting, a substantial shift from the June surveys, shown in red, when a 
significant majority had a modal forecast for no change.  Nonetheless, survey 
respondents note some residual uncertainty about the degree of easing at this meeting 
and, on average, put nearly a 20 percent probability on a 50 basis point reduction in 
the target range. 
Survey respondents’ modal target rate projections for year-end 2019 have also 
coalesced, as shown in panel 4.  In the June surveys, again shown in the red bars, 
views were split almost evenly between those expecting two cuts in 2019 and those 
expecting none.  In the July surveys, shown in blue, roughly two-thirds of survey 
 
3 The materials used by Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
July 30-31, 2019
87 of 329


 
 
 
respondents have modal projections for two 25 basis point cuts to the target range 
in 2019. 
On panel 5, while most respondents now have similar modal projections for the 
target rate at the end of this year, a fair amount of uncertainty remains in respondents’ 
views.  The average of respondents’ probability distributions shows substantial 
weight on a range of outcomes.  Some survey respondents note that risks associated 
with trade developments and the global economic outlook are influencing the 
uncertainty around their forecasts.  Some also cite a perceived divergence in views 
among Committee members, as well as a shifting interpretation of the Committee’s 
overall reaction function.  Respondents cite these latter two issues as influencing their 
rating of the effectiveness of FOMC communications, which fell from the June to 
July Desk surveys. 
Current market pricing appears broadly consistent with the survey “takeaways.”  
Federal funds futures imply 30 basis points of decline in the effective rate following 
this meeting, potentially reflecting some possibility of a cut larger than 25 basis 
points.  Federal fund futures imply 46 basis points of cumulative declines by the 
September FOMC meeting and 67 basis points by year-end.  So although the rate path 
implied by the median of survey modal forecasts has 50 basis points of total cuts 
through the year-end, as noted in panel 4, market pricing suggests some possibility of 
more extensive cuts and, to some degree, may reflect negative risk premiums. 
One area of the survey in which views do not appear to have coalesced is around 
expectations for near-term balance sheet policy.  As shown in panel 6, of the 
respondents who expect a rate cut this week, around 40 percent expect the Committee 
to stop portfolio runoff at this meeting.  Some of those respondents attributed their 
views to communications by FOMC members who were perceived as expressing a 
preference to avoid balance sheet and interest rate policy working at “cross  
purposes.”  Market participants almost universally noted that the direct economic 
effects of ending runoff at this meeting would be small.  However, some noted that 
such a decision could have a policy-signaling effect, although they also noted the 
move would be interpreted in the context of other policy actions and communications. 
On this point, panel 7 on exhibit 2 summarizes survey respondents’ expectations 
for communications in the statement and press conference tomorrow.  Respondents 
generally expect limited changes to the statement language.  Most indicate 
expectations for the statement to continue to reference uncertainties around the 
outlook, and many expect it to indicate that the Committee will “closely monitor” 
incoming information and “act as appropriate.”  In the press conference, some 
respondents expect the Chair to characterize any cut to the target range as 
precautionary in nature, in light of global risks to the outlook for the U.S. economy 
and low inflation. 
The recent moves in expectations for near-term domestic policy come amid a 
global shift toward more accommodative monetary policy.  Panel 8 shows the GDP-
weighted average policy rate for the rest of the world.  Market expectations of future 
July 30-31, 2019
88 of 329


 
 
 
policy rates have been declining since late last year.  But actual policy rates have 
followed more recently.  The central banks in Australia, Indonesia, Korea, Russia, 
South Africa, and Turkey are all easing over the past month, and a number of others 
are shifting to an easing bias. 
Market participants have been particularly focused on a perceived shift in stance 
from the ECB.  At its meeting last week, the ECB Governing Council restored its 
easing bias for policy rates and further emphasized the symmetry of its inflation goal.  
It also tasked the staff with examining various easing options.  This announcement 
reinforced widely held expectations for a 10 basis point cut to the deposit rate in 
September and a new round of asset purchases beginning in December.  
Nonetheless, market contacts continue to express some questions about how 
effective prospective easing measures will be at boosting inflation, particularly in the 
euro area.  As shown in panel 9, while there has been a small uptick in far-forward 
inflation compensation in the United States and euro area, these measures remain near 
recent lows in the United States and near all-time lows in the euro area.  
I’ll now turn to my second question:  How have these changes in policy 
expectations affected financial conditions?  Many contacts note that expectations for 
more accommodative monetary policy globally, particularly from the FOMC and 
ECB, have played a strong role in supporting financial conditions and likely offset 
some of the imprint on the global growth outlook made by trade tensions and other 
risks.  Panel 10 shows the rebound in global equity indexes that came alongside the 
more accommodative shifts in policy expectations in the United States and abroad 
this year. These indexes reached all-time highs over the intermeeting period.   
The shifts in policy expectations in the United States and abroad have also 
affected currency markets.  Though the turn in FOMC policy expectations this year 
has led to some depreciation in the dollar, these pressures have been offset in part by 
further signs of weak growth and increased prospects for easing abroad as well as 
continuing positive U.S. yield differentials relative to other advanced foreign 
economies.  As shown in panel 11, the trade-weighted dollar has fluctuated in a 
relatively narrow range so far this year after appreciating notably in 2018. 
Against this backdrop and amid a recent pickup in commentary on the dollar and 
other steps by the U.S. Administration, the possibility of U.S. foreign exchange 
intervention to weaken the dollar has emerged as a topic of discussion among 
investors.  While intervention is generally characterized as unlikely and as not 
contributing to recent price action, the perceived probability of intervention has been 
rising, and market participants are highly attentive to this topic.  
I now turn to the third question:  How have market participants’ views of global 
risks changed?  Reduced concern among market participants about some proximate 
risks has also supported risk asset prices.  Following the G-20 meeting in late June, 
some respondents to the Desk surveys pared back their modal forecasts for further 
escalation in U.S.–China trade tensions.  Most survey respondents now expect that 
July 30-31, 2019
89 of 329


 
 
 
current tariffs will remain in place for some time, as shown in panel 12.  The White 
House and the Congress also appear close to agreeing on a budget and debt ceiling 
deal.  In addition, market participants noted that the rebound in the June employment 
report and June CPI, as well as stronger consumer demand in the second quarter, 
prompted a slight reassessment of the risks to the U.S. growth outlook.  
That all said, contacts continue to note that some significant downside risks 
remain.  Survey respondents still see U.S.–China trade risks as skewed to the 
downside, and many of China’s longer-term challenges remain, with the recent 
restructuring of two small Chinese banks highlighting funding market vulnerabilities.  
Elsewhere, the likelihood of a no-deal Brexit has risen to perhaps its highest level, 
according to some contacts, with the pound sterling having depreciated notably since 
the appointment of the new British prime minister.  This all leaves some contacts 
wondering if market participants are complacent about underlying risks or placing too 
much faith in central banks’ ability to address risks through accommodative policy. 
I’ll turn now to recent money market developments, summarized on panel 13 of 
your third exhibit, and conclude with two operational updates.  Over the intermeeting 
period, money market rates were slightly more elevated, reflecting the continuation of 
a trend of higher rates relative to IOER.  As shown in panel 14, the effective federal 
funds rate, shown as the dark blue diamond, averaged 5 basis points above IOER, and 
the secured overnight financing rate, or SOFR, averaged 9 basis points above IOER, 
shown by the pink diamond. 
Unsecured money market rates also displayed somewhat greater day-over-day 
variability.  As shown in panel 15, the spreads of the effective federal funds rate and 
the median Eurodollar rate relative to the IOER rate have become more variable as 
rates have risen above IOER, with a notable pickup in daily changes since late March.  
The range of rates traded in unsecured markets within each day has also widened, as 
depicted in panel 16, which shows the average daily interquartile range of federal 
funds and Eurodollar trades relative to the median rate. 
Market participants have focused on two drivers of these dynamics.  First, they 
have attributed fluctuations in the effective federal funds rate primarily to pass-
through from elevated repo rates.  As shown in panel 17, the effective federal funds 
rate, shown in light blue, has tended to rise and fall with secured rates, shown here 
with SOFR in dark blue.  This pass-through also contributed to the higher dispersion 
in unsecured rates within each day that I showed in panel 16, reflecting more 
competitive conditions in the morning when lenders have the option to allocate to 
repo followed by lower rates in the afternoon when lenders have fewer options.  
Market participants continue to attribute higher repo rates to the high level of 
Treasury security issuance in an environment of elevated dealer inventories of 
Treasury securities.  These inventories, shown in panel 18, are concentrated mainly 
among a handful of primary dealers that are reportedly facilitating customer demand 
to acquire Treasury securities in an environment of expectations for declining yields.  
July 30-31, 2019
90 of 329


 
 
 
Second, market participants note that the gradual increase in unsecured rates is 
occurring against the backdrop of a long-run trend toward lower reserve balances.  
Over the intermeeting period, the level of reserves was little changed on net.  
However, it’s fluctuating around multiyear lows, and some market participants have 
made the association between the gradual increase in unsecured rates relative to the 
IOER rate and the declining reserves since SOMA redemptions began, as shown in 
panel 19.  Panel 20 shows a longer-term trend in this relationship, with the level of 
reserves plotted against the spread between the effective federal funds rate and the 
IOER rate, broken into three time periods:  January 2010 to September 2014, when 
the balance sheet was growing, in gray; September 2014 to October 2017, when the 
balance sheet was held constant, in red; and October 2017 to now, when the balance 
sheet has been declining, in dark blue—the same data as I showed in panel 19. 
Of course, these charts just show that the trends in reserves and the EFFR–IOER 
spread were coincident—other underlying drivers could be at work.  For example, as 
I noted, during this recent period there were also sizable increases in Treasury debt 
issuance and associated upward pressure on bill yields and repo rates, which may 
have been contributing factors to the higher effective federal funds rate.  Nonetheless, 
analyses conducted by staff at the Board and in the New York research department 
show a small but statistically significant negative relationship between changes in the 
spread between the volume-weighted average federal funds rate and the IOER rate 
and changes in reserve levels, which may provide some evidence of a modest slope in 
reserve demand at current levels.  The presence of this small negative relationship, or 
“gentle slope,” is robust over recent years, even accounting for the potential influence 
of other factors, such as changes in repo rates.  
Panel 21, which we’ve shown variants of at previous meetings, depicts this 
relationship in a simple plot showing daily changes in the level of reserves against 
changes in the spread of the volume-weighted average federal funds rate to the IOER 
rate since October 2017.  This chart and staff analysis use the volume-weighted 
average federal funds rate because it moves in smaller increments and is more 
sensitive than the effective federal funds rate, which is the median.  These analyses 
suggest the slope is currently small—in the most recent data, it’s less than 1 basis 
point per $100 billion of reserves. 
As we look ahead, the level of reserves as projected in the light blue line in panel 
22 shows a decline to between $1.2 trillion and $1.3 trillion in December, the lowest 
reserve level since early 2011.  Should the debt ceiling impasse be resolved this week, 
it’s expected to lead to a more gradual increase in bill issuance and TGA balance in 
the coming months than if the impasse had extended further.  This has the effect of 
lowering forecasts of the level of reserves into September but smoothing the pace of 
reserve decline over the remainder of the year.  Even with the expected more gradual 
increase in Treasury bill issuance and rise in the TGA through the third and fourth 
quarters, there is still likely to be modest upward pressure on bill yields and other 
money market rates over the coming months. 
July 30-31, 2019
91 of 329


 
 
 
These are just indicative forecasts and are subject to change.  In fact, the 
Treasury’s refunding announcement late yesterday means we will likely be revising 
our projected year-end reserve level lower, as its guidance suggested $100 billion 
more in TGA balances than we had assumed in the forecast that I showed today.  
Conversely, were the Committee to conclude balance sheet runoff as of August 1, this 
would shift the schedule of projected reserve balances higher by about $70 billion, the 
difference in the projected redemptions of SOMA securities holdings.  The red line in 
panel 22 shows the implication of this difference for reserve levels based on the 
forecast made before the Treasury’s refunding announcement late yesterday. 
Taking all of this together, the staff will continue to monitor the outlook closely 
for signs that rising repo rates or the ongoing decline in reserve levels are putting 
additional upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate or resulting in higher 
variability in the rate. 
Regarding operational updates, as noted at the previous meeting and as shown in 
panel 23, with Treasury yields remaining at lower levels and MBS prepayments 
remaining high, the Desk continued to reinvest agency MBS principal payments over 
the intermeeting period.  Based on current market rates and prepayment forecasts, the 
Desk expects to continue to reinvest modest amounts over the coming months. 
Separately, as discussed in the memo circulated before this meeting, the Desk 
plans to resume CUSIP aggregation of SOMA holdings of Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac agency MBS to reduce administrative costs and operational complexity and 
expects to release a statement in August with details on the aggregation strategy. 
Finally, our plans for upcoming small-value exercises are summarized in the 
appendix.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  That concludes my remarks, and we’d be happy to 
take questions. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Any questions for Lorie or Patricia?  [No response]  
Seeing none, we need a vote to ratify the domestic open market operations conducted since the 
June meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  All in favor, aye.  [Chorus of ayes]  Thanks very much.  Next we’ll 
turn to the review of the economic and financial situation.  David, would you like to start? 
July 30-31, 2019
92 of 329


 
 
 
MR. LEBOW.4  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the handout titled 
“Material for Briefing on the U.S. Outlook,” and there’s also a separate handout 
showing this morning’s data on PCE prices, which I’ll come to in a few minutes. 
Panel 1 summarizes the near-term GDP outlook.  As you can see in row 1, the 
BEA’s advance estimate for second-quarter GDP growth was 2.1 percent, which was 
a little below our Tealbook estimate of 2.5 percent.  Friday’s release also included 
historical revisions to the GDP accounts.  And though real GDP growth was about 
unrevised, on average, over the past five years, growth was revised down in 2018.  In 
2019:Q1, GDP growth was unrevised at 3.1 percent.  
Despite the modest downward surprise in second-quarter GDP growth, we saw 
Friday’s report as a small positive for our outlook on net.  The downward GDP 
surprise occurred in spending categories that typically provide relatively little signal 
about future growth, and the report also included a sizable upward revision to 
household income so far this year, which led us to nudge up our projection for 
consumer spending in the second half.  Thus, we now project real GDP growth of 
1.9 percent in the second half, a bit above the Tealbook projection. 
We continue to think that GDP growth in the first half of this year was boosted by 
transitory factors, and we project a slowdown in the second half as these dissipate.  
The spending components contributing to that slowdown can be seen in panel 2.  As 
you can see from the gray portion of the bars, government spending made an 
unusually large contribution to growth in the first half, as there was a surge in 
construction spending by state and local governments.  We expect this spending to 
ease off, although, admittedly, the timing is uncertain.  We also expect inventory 
investment, shown in yellow, to slow further from a level that is still somewhat 
elevated.  However, as shown in blue, growth in private domestic final purchases—
that is, consumer spending, business investment, and residential investment—is not 
projected to slow in the second half.  We do expect business investment to weaken 
further, as we discussed in a box in the Tealbook.  However, we anticipate that the 
slowing in investment will be largely offset by a pickup in housing activity, driven by 
the decline in mortgage interest rates since late last year.  And as I noted, we have 
nudged up our projection for consumer spending in the second half, but we still 
expect PCE growth to be about the same as its average pace in the first half.  In 2020, 
not shown, we still project GDP growth to remain a little above potential and then to 
slow a little further in 2021.  Thus, our baseline outlook for real activity remains 
generally favorable.  It is also a little stronger than in the June Tealbook, with the 
upward revision mostly reflecting the incoming data on spending and income. 
The recent labor market data have remained solid, though the pace of 
improvement has slowed relative to last year.  BLS’s estimate of private payroll 
employment, the red line in panel 3, rebounded in June after a weak reading in May, 
and the three-month moving average of private job gains stood at 156,000 in June—
down noticeably from 2018’s average pace of 215,000 jobs per month but still above 
 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lebow are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
July 30-31, 2019
93 of 329


 
 
 
the pace to keep labor utilization constant.  This stepdown is also evident from the 
blue line in the panel, which plots a series that pools BLS’s estimate of private payroll 
gains with our translation of the firm-level data collected by the payroll processor 
ADP.  As you can see from the black line, the available ADP data for July suggest 
that private payrolls rose 135,000 this month.  We get BLS data for July this Friday.  
Looking ahead, we expect payroll employment growth to slow a little further over the 
second half of the year as output decelerates. 
Panel 4 shows our medium-term projection for the unemployment rate.  The 
picture should look familiar.  With actual output expected to outpace potential 
through next year, the unemployment rate edges down a bit further next year and 
remains about 1 percentage point below our estimate of its natural rate.  This path is a 
touch lower than in the June Tealbook. 
Your next page summarizes the inflation outlook.  But first, please turn to the 
separate handout titled “Material for PCE Price Index Update,” which summarizes 
this morning’s data on monthly PCE prices.5  Over the 12 months ending in June, 
overall PCE prices rose 1.4 percent and core PCE prices rose 1.6 percent; both figures 
were a little below our Tealbook estimates.  The surprise was in the nonmarket 
portion of these prices, from which we generally take little signal for future inflation. 
If you return to panel 5 in the main set of exhibits, you will see that the dashed 
line shows the three-month change in core PCE prices.  Please note that this panel 
does not reflect this morning’s data.  It presents our estimates at the time of the 
Tealbook, but the basic picture will be the same.  The dot labeled “March” illustrates 
the very low core inflation readings over the first three months of the year, which then 
rebounded in the subsequent three months to June.  With this morning’s data, the 
three-month change to June was 2.5 percent, a little below the value plotted here but 
still quite consistent with the view that core inflation has been rebounding from 
transitorily low readings. 
Panel 6 presents our current post-Tealbook inflation forecast, taking into account 
the revised quarterly BEA data that were released last Friday.  In the Tealbook, our 
projection for core inflation this year was a little above the June projection, but as you 
can see from the solid and dotted black lines, our projection is now back where it was 
in June.  We now expect core inflation of 1.8 percent this year, edging up to 
1.9 percent in 2020 and 2021.  Overall, PCE price inflation, the red line, is expected 
to come in a little lower than core both this year and next, as projected declines in 
crude oil prices feed through into consumer energy prices. 
Panel 7 shows our decomposition of core PCE inflation, the black line, into the 
contributions of various fundamental determinants.  The relatively flat contour of core 
inflation over the medium term largely reflects our view that underlying inflation, the 
gray bars—which we define as the rate of PCE price inflation that would prevail in 
the absence of slack, idiosyncratic relative price changes, or supply shocks—will 
 
5 The materials used by Mr. Lebow are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
July 30-31, 2019
94 of 329


 
 
 
remain constant over the next few years at 1.8 percent.  High rates of resource 
utilization, the red bars, are expected to put upward pressure on core inflation.  The 
contribution is small, however, and is partly offset after this year by a negative 
contribution from relative import prices, the green bars. 
We interpret the apparent stability of underlying inflation in recent years as 
reflecting well-anchored long-run inflation expectations on the part of wage- and 
price-setters.  We therefore closely monitor various expectations measures, including 
those obtained from surveys of households, professional forecasters, and financial 
market participants.  Such expectations measures are included in several of the 
models we use to inform our judgmental estimate of underlying inflation. 
One such survey-based measure—the median value, given in the Michigan 
survey, of the expected rate of price change over the next 5 to 10 years—is plotted as 
the blue line in panel 8.  As you know, this series has been running near 2.5 percent 
for the past few years, after having drifted lower from 2014 to 2016.  The series has 
been a little more volatile this year, and the preliminary reading for July moved up to 
2.6 percent from 2.3 percent in June. 
In addition to the median, the chart shows the 25th and 75th percentiles of this 
distribution.  I include these for two reasons.  First, as a reminder that for all the 
emphasis on the median as a summary measure, there is a reasonably wide 
distribution of households’ responses to questions about expected inflation.  And, 
second, to illustrate that as the median declined a few tenths between 2014 and 2016, 
the 75th percentile of the distribution declined more notably, from roughly 
4.5 percent to 3.5 percent.  Fewer respondents report that they expect relatively high 
inflation rates of 5 percent or higher, and that’s bringing down the high end of the 
distribution. 
Knowing what to make of these developments is more difficult.  The behavior of 
inflation leads us to estimate that underlying inflation has remained roughly stable, 
notwithstanding the decline in inflation compensation from financial markets or the 
decline in the Michigan median and also notwithstanding the larger decline in the 
75th percentile shown here.  Perhaps none of these measures adequately captures the 
inflation expectations that are relevant for wage and price determination, or perhaps 
the observed changes in expectations have not been large enough to show through in 
actual inflation.  But we do see the decline in some of these expectations measures as 
pointing to a downside risk for the inflation outlook.  And, at a minimum, we can say 
that we are not seeing evidence of the increase in inflation expectations that might 
lead underlying inflation to move higher and so be more consistent with the 
Committee’s inflation objective.  Shaghil will now continue our presentation. 
MR. AHMED.6  Thanks, David.  I’ll be referring to the handout titled “Material 
for Briefing on the International Outlook.”  The dog days of summer are here, and 
 
6 The materials used by Mr. Ahmed are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
July 30-31, 2019
95 of 329


 
 
 
they bring an outlook for the global economy that calls for cloudy skies with some 
possibility of sudden thunderstorms. 
My presentation revolves around two key questions about this forecast.  First, are 
the skies clearing up—are we seeing signs that foreign economic growth is coming 
out of its soft patch?  Second, what are the chances for flash floods—have downside 
risks, particularly those associated with trade policy developments, increased since 
your previous meeting?  Our short answer to the first question is that although there 
are signs in some countries of a pickup in growth, the evidence is not yet robust that 
the foreign economies are out of their soft patch.  On the second, though downside 
risks have not intensified, they haven’t subsided much from their elevated level 
either.  I will now turn to the details. 
Indicators suggest a pickup in GDP growth abroad in the second quarter, to 
2 percent at an annual rate from 1.5 percent in the first, as shown in the left panel of 
your first exhibit.  This growth is below the potential rate, and we expect it to remain 
so for the rest of the year, but it should gradually pick up to about its potential pace of 
2.5 percent next year.   
But several considerations give us some pause.  First, indicators on the whole 
have come in a bit weaker than expected, and we have revised down a touch near-
term aggregate foreign growth.  The right panel shows the evolution of the staff 
forecast over a longer period.  As you can see, our outlook for the foreign economies 
for this year is still significantly below what we were predicting at the start of the 
year, especially for the emerging market economies.  Second, in your next exhibit, the 
second-quarter estimated pickup is primarily due to improvements in Canada and 
Mexico, two economies with a high weight in our U.S. export-weighted foreign 
aggregate.  A GDP-weighted aggregate would not show a pickup.  Moreover, the 
indicators from Mexico are by no means suggesting a red-hot pace of that economy 
but rather a turnaround to modest growth from a small contraction at the start of the 
year.  In several other key regions, such as China, the euro area, and the United 
Kingdom, we estimate that growth has declined from its first-quarter jump.  Third, the 
malaise in global manufacturing, shown in the right panel, continues, while services 
are still performing relatively better. 
In addition, as can be seen from the left panel of your next exhibit, although 
inflation bumped up temporarily in the second quarter, in part as a result of higher 
energy prices, underlying inflation pressures remain low in the advanced foreign 
economies.  Specifically, for the euro area, as Lorie discussed, inflation compensation 
readings are near record lows.  With subdued inflation and concerns about growth 
persisting, foreign central bankers have more reasons to sweat than just this summer’s 
heatwave.  As shown to the right, consistent with their recent “dovish” 
communications, we have revised down our policy rate paths in the case of several 
AFEs.  At its July 25 meeting, the ECB left its deposit rate unchanged but modified 
its forward-guidance language to signal potential rate cuts and said that it would 
consider resuming asset purchases.  Board staff expect the ECB to lower its deposit 
rate 20 basis points to negative 0.6 percent at its next meeting and to resume large-
July 30-31, 2019
96 of 329


 
 
 
scale asset purchases later in the year.  In emerging market economies, too, the 
rhetoric has turned more “dovish” and, as Lorie noted, several central banks have 
loosened policy.  It is noteworthy that we now see it taking more monetary 
accommodation in the foreign economies to achieve growth rates for 2020 that for 
several economies are lower than what we wrote down for that year at the start of the 
year. 
As shown on the next page, EMEs appear to be benefiting from expectations of 
more accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies, which have 
helped keep financial conditions in many of these economies benign.  The scatterplot 
on the left shows that since mid-May, many EMEs have seen their currencies 
appreciate against the dollar, and these appreciations have been larger for those 
economies that rank as relatively more vulnerable according to our cross-country 
EME vulnerability index.  As shown to the right, EME credit spreads have also 
narrowed since May and flows to EME-dedicated funds have improved, with flows to 
bond funds turning positive again.  Were it not for recent declines in expected policy 
rate paths in advanced economies, especially the United States, we would likely be 
revising down EME growth more. 
Regarding global risks in your next exhibit, a continuing headwind for monetary 
policy has been trade tensions.  These tensions are registering somewhat lower 
readings on the thermostat.  For now, the U.S.–Mexico front is relatively calm after 
the immediate threat of U.S. tariffs on Mexico was dropped in early June.  In 
addition, at the G-20 meeting in late June, Presidents Trump and Xi agreed to restart 
trade negotiations, which actually got under way today, and further U.S. tariff 
increases on imports from China have been indefinitely postponed.  But as indicated 
in the chart, even after some decline in our trade policy uncertainty index from its 
latest spike, the index remains high and ongoing concerns about trade policy could 
continue to impede investment and activity.  Moreover, there could be a reescalation 
of trade tensions and further increases in tariffs, including on autos.  
On the next page, how have the two recent waves of trade policy uncertainty—in 
the first half of last year and in May and June of this year—affected economic 
activity, and how could the effects play out over the next couple of years?  Certainly, 
as can be seen in the chart, the heightened trade policy uncertainty has been 
accompanied by a slowdown in both global trade and global production.  The effects 
of trade policy uncertainty, however, are difficult to disentangle from other factors, 
such as the role of the global tech cycle and country-specific factors that are 
restraining global demand, including China’s deleveraging, complications resulting 
from tighter emissions standards for new motor vehicles in Europe, and uncertainties 
associated with Brexit.  But we keep trying, and, in the next exhibit, I present our 
latest evidence on this. 
My colleagues, Matteo Iacoviello and some others, have estimated a monthly 
structural vector autoregression, or VAR, model that includes industrial production, 
trade policy uncertainty, the dollar, world imports, stock prices, financial spreads, and 
actual tariffs using data from 1985 to the present.  They map the estimated effects on 
July 30-31, 2019
97 of 329


 
 
 
industrial production of trade policy uncertainty obtained from this model into GDP 
effects. 
The three panels in the exhibit show how much the two waves of trade policy 
uncertainty since the beginning of 2018 have held back GDP so far and are expected 
to over the forecast period, according to the VAR model.  The black lines show that 
trade tensions are estimated to subtract about 1 percent from GDP in the advanced 
foreign and emerging market economies as well as in the United States.  The blue 
lines isolate the effects from just the first wave of the increase in trade policy 
uncertainty in the first half of 2018.  The estimated drag on output due to trade policy 
uncertainty builds up over time; the model predicts that the effects from the first wave 
would be reaching their troughs just about now, and that the new wave in May and 
June will have further knock-on effects in coming periods.  The lags in the effects can 
help account for the puzzle we have been wrestling with—that while trade policy 
uncertainty featured prominently as a concern in surveys, we didn’t see material 
direct effects on trade and investment until more recently.  Although the exact 
magnitude of these effects remains uncertain, these results highlight both the 
likelihood that trade policy uncertainty played an important role in the recent 
manufacturing slowdown and the probability that the adverse effects have not fully 
played out yet. 
Our “Global Investment Slump” alternative scenario in the Tealbook, presented in 
the last exhibit, explores a more severe variant of this possibility using our SIGMA 
model.  Specifically, in this scenario, we assume that the unprecedented level of trade 
policy uncertainty generates hits to consumer and business confidence both here and 
abroad that set in motion a global investment slump and reduce productivity.  Safe-
haven flows lead to a substantial appreciation of the dollar.  U.S. real GDP growth 
falls about 1.5 percentage points below the baseline, as does foreign GDP growth.  
And, with U.S. core PCE inflation remaining below 2 percent, the federal funds rate 
declines. 
All told, trade policy uncertainty continues to be an important source of downside 
risk to the global economy.  But although trade tensions have been the talk of the 
summer, I would like to end my presentation with just a one-word preview of the fall:  
Brexit.  [Laughter]  Thank you.  Beth will now continue our presentation. 
MS. KLEE.7  That’s the one-word start to my presentation, actually.  [Laughter]  
Thank you, Shaghil.  I’ll be referring to the “Material for Briefing on Financial 
Stability Developments.”  You received the staff’s assessment of financial stability—
affectionately known as “the QS”—a couple of weeks ago.  As always, the staff from 
across the System contributed to the assessment.  We continue to view overall 
vulnerabilities facing the financial system as “moderate.”  High business borrowing 
and high-ish asset valuations continue to coexist with low household borrowing and 
resilient financial institutions.  Separately, we dug into financial market liquidity 
 
7 The materials used by Ms. Klee are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
July 30-31, 2019
98 of 329


 
 
 
conditions and found some evidence of increased fragility in at least a couple of 
markets.  I’ll address these areas in four parts. 
First, asset valuation pressures are “notable,” which in our taxonomy means a 
notch below “elevated.”  The top panel of your first exhibit shows an index of overall 
asset valuation pressures and risk appetite constructed by the staff to summarize a 
wide range of indicators.  We’ve used this index for several years now, and its current 
reading suggests valuations in the upper part of their historical distribution.  This 
picture broadly echoes the staff’s judgmental assessment.  For the year and a half 
before the market turmoil in late 2018, our index was near its 90th percentile, and we 
assessed valuation pressures to be “elevated.”  When pressures eased somewhat late 
last year, we downgraded our assessment to “notable,” and it remains there today.   
As shown in the middle-left panel, Treasury term premiums are now negative by 
many measures, which has put upward pressure on prices in a range of markets.  As a 
result, as shown to the right, corporate bond yields are near the bottom of their 
distribution of the past 20 years, and equity prices, which Lorie showed, have reached 
new peaks.  Real estate markets have also shown some signs of heat.  As shown in the 
bottom-left panel, commercial real estate prices remain sky-high, while residential 
property price-to-rent ratios, which aren’t shown, remain a touch above trend.  
Because the high levels of prices is importantly due to low Treasury yields, risk 
premiums are not generally compressed.  For example, as shown in the bottom right, 
the staff estimate of the equity risk premium is around the bottom third of its 
distribution, and risk premiums in corporate bond and other markets aren’t very low.  
In other words, we have a configuration of elevated asset prices that appear to be 
supported by low Treasury yields—at least for now. 
Second, business borrowing is hot, while household borrowing is not.  As shown 
in the top-left panel of your second exhibit, gross debt to assets of corporations is 
high.  The most recent observations are indicated with dots because there was an 
accounting change implemented in the first quarter that leaves businesses looking 
even more levered than before.  That said, the picture wasn’t looking good even 
before this accounting change brought these additional leases onto firms’ balance 
sheets. 
As shown to the right, institutional leveraged loans generally targeted for larger 
firms, the red area, and private credit for midsized firms, the yellow, green, and blue 
areas, continue to expand.  We’re going to focus first on the $1.2 trillion of leveraged 
loans.  We know that for 40 percent of borrowers of newly issued loans, debt is more 
than six times earnings, representing a new record high.  This peak exceeds that of the 
credit cycle just before the financial crisis and suggests that investor appetite for 
holding leveraged loans continues to climb.  Focusing on the $900 billion in private 
credit, we know less about these loans.  Anecdotal reports suggest that growth in 
private credit represents some migration of intermediation to nonbanks, as these 
borrowers would likely have depended on bank financing in years past.  In contrast to 
business debt, household balances, which aren’t shown, have continued to grow about 
July 30-31, 2019
99 of 329


 
 
 
in line with nominal GDP.  The moderate increases we’ve seen, on net, continue to 
accrue to households with very high credit scores. 
Third, financial leverage and funding risk are both low but rising.  Banks continue 
to maintain strong capital positions, and results of the Federal Reserve’s 2019 stress 
tests suggest that large banks should be able to withstand a severely adverse 
downturn.  However, there is some indication that bank leverage might increase over 
the next couple of years.  For example, payouts at the largest banks are expected to be 
more than 100 percent of earnings this year and next.  In addition, as shown in the 
middle-left panel, some G-SIBs have announced medium-term targets that imply 
declines in capital ratios of about 100 to 300 basis points from current levels.   
Regarding the nonbank sector, we took a close look this round at Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac.  Our assessment is that systemic vulnerabilities created by these GSEs 
are low to moderate, and the vulnerability of the GSEs to financial or macroeconomic 
shocks is low.  Importantly, this latter assessment relies on the agencies’ 
conservatorship.  For example, as shown to the right, the GSEs are required by their 
regulator to run the Federal Reserve’s severely adverse scenario through their own 
models and compute the resulting capital needs; that’s shown by the brighter red line.  
These are estimated to be less than the available remaining draws of these institutions, 
which is the blue line, or, indeed, for comparison, the cumulative draws since 2009, 
which is the maroon line.  That said, even the modest capital needs under this recent 
stress-test scenario swamp the GSEs’ own retained capital of about $3 billion each. 
In other parts of the nonbank sector, as shown in the bottom-left panel, available 
data on hedge fund leverage suggest a snapback to high levels following a temporary 
depression in late 2018.  The exposures of dealers to hedge funds in the CDS market 
are becoming increasingly concentrated, with a few hedge funds accounting for a 
large share of these exposures. 
Separately, as shown to the right, outstanding balances in prime funds are starting 
to creep higher.  Although current levels are certainly low relative to those seen 
before the SEC reform, the growth suggests emerging vulnerabilities associated with 
these funds and warrants continued monitoring.  Inflows into prime funds are mostly 
into retail funds, which we believe are less susceptible to runs than their institutional 
counterparts.  But the inflows are occurring against a backdrop of some expansion of 
money fund alternative vehicles, which have fragile structures and are used by 
institutional investors. 
Fourth, market liquidity is, overall, in good shape, although with some caveats.  
You’ll remember that the market volatility experienced in a couple of episodes in 
2018 was accompanied by anecdotes about illiquid trading conditions, and we 
promised to look into it further.  We made good on our promise, and we come to you 
this round with the first part of our planned analysis, with more to come.   
The black line in the top panel of your third exhibit plots a composite index of 
Treasury market illiquidity, which incorporates standard measures such as bid-ask 
July 30-31, 2019
100 of 329


 
 
 
spreads and market depth.  It goes up when liquidity gets “bad” or “thin” or 
“illiquid.”  The red line plots implied volatility for the Treasury securities market.  It 
goes up when volatility goes up.  Relative to history, the current level suggests that 
liquidity in the Treasury securities market is about “as good as it gets” and responds 
little to increased volatility. 
The equity futures market, while, generally speaking, still a highly liquid market, 
tells a different story.  As shown in the middle panel, the illiquidity index for equity 
futures was quite elevated in early and late 2018, even compared with volatile times 
over the past 14 years.  In addition, the illiquidity index in the equity futures market 
has become more sensitive to market volatility.  In particular, even though the market 
volatility in late 2018 wasn’t extreme, equity market liquidity deteriorated to levels 
not seen since the financial crisis. 
Markets with fragile liquidity are more prone to a flash event, defined as a big 
change in prices that is at least partially reversed in a very short period of time.  As 
shown in the bottom panel, flash events in the equity futures market were more 
frequent in 2018 than in any year since the crisis.  This increased frequency coincides 
with principal trading firms coming to center stage in these markets, as liquidity 
provision is concentrated in only a few of these firms.  This concentration may lead 
liquidity to evaporate in stressful periods:  If even one of these firms abruptly 
withdraws, liquidity drops substantially, and a modest sell order may cause a sudden 
and outsized drop in prices. 
The memo giving our analysis goes into more depth about market liquidity, 
including an exploration of foreign exchange and corporate bond markets.  In general, 
liquidity may have become a little more fragile in FX in recent years, while bond 
market liquidity hasn’t changed much.  However, there’s still a lot we don’t know, 
and so we, as well as other agencies, will continue to monitor developments. 
Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My colleagues and I are happy to answer your questions. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Questions for our briefers before we have an opportunity 
for comment on financial stability?  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  This question is for David.  I just want a clarification, more than anything—
if we take your chart 4 on the unemployment rate, and the gap implied by the natural rate relative 
to current unemployment—is that related to the calculation in chart 7 of the decomposition and 
the influence of slack on the inflation realizations?  
MR. LEBOW.  Yes, exactly. 
July 30-31, 2019
101 of 329


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  Okay.  So if that’s the case, then what if you—so these are related, but not 
completely the same question.  So if you took a different approach to calculating the natural 
rate—something simple, saying “We’ve missed for so many years that maybe we don’t have 
everything in our model,” and you reduce this gap quite a lot just from that, what would happen 
to this red?  I don’t know what the exact coefficient on your Phillips curve is, but here’s what 
I’m worried about, and I wanted to just have you comment on that.  If you think underlying 
inflation is 1.8 percent and the other factors are dragging it down, then the disappearance of this 
red component, because we’ve got the wrong gap, poses a real risk to inflation that isn’t featured 
in this.  It seems modest, but we’re talking about tenths.  And so I just want you to maybe talk 
about the risk assessment there and what this would imply. 
MR. LEBOW.  So our estimates of underlying inflation and our estimates of the natural 
rate are not unrelated.  My colleague Chris Nekarda showed, in a Board briefing within the past 
couple of months, a model of his where these two are estimated jointly, and there is a 
relationship. 
If you would impose on the model a lower natural rate so that there’s less labor market 
tightness, as you’re saying, then the model would generate—I hope I don’t say this backward— 
a higher estimate of underlying inflation.  In other words, if the tight labor market is not holding 
up inflation, then something else has to be.  And it would come up with a higher estimate of 
underlying inflation. 
Now, his model kind of prefers a configuration such as we have in our baseline outlook.  
In part, that has to do with how much the model wants its estimate of the natural rate to have 
declined over the past decade, given what it sees about demographics and so on.  But, yes, these 
are related, as you’re saying. 
July 30-31, 2019
102 of 329


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  So is the right way to think about this that discussing what’s in chart 4 
doesn’t really change the projection of inflation, it just changes the composition of whether you 
think it’s coming from underlying inflation or from the gray versus the red?  That’s what I 
thought the Nekarda piece would say—it’s trying to figure out which component to allocate it to, 
but the underlying picture is roughly the same. 
MR. LEBOW.  I think that’s right.  I mean, I wouldn’t want to assert that, quantitatively, 
it would have no effect, but it certainly goes in that direction.  And, as you see, the effect of labor 
market slack or a tight labor market in our inflation projection is not large. 
MS. DALY.  The reason I’m asking this question and pressing this point is, this seems 
implausible that we missed by this much for so long.  If it has a material effect on what your 
inflation projections are, that’s useful to talk about.  If it doesn’t, then we can continue to look at 
this picture.  I guess that’s what I was trying to assess. 
MR. LEBOW.  I’ll also mention, we had a box in the Tealbook that you probably saw, 
which does a simple calculation, saying— 
MS. DALY.  I saw that. 
MR. LEBOW.  —given our estimate of underlying inflation, how low would the 
unemployment rate have to be according to our Phillips curve to get you to 2 percent? 
MS. DALY.  So, 3.4 percent. 
MR. LEBOW.  Yes, 3.4 percent. 
MS. DALY.  Okay, thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thinking about our conversation that we 
had about the framework—and I think it was Vice Chair Williams who talked about trying to 
July 30-31, 2019
103 of 329


 
 
 
determine, are these cyclical trends that we’re seeing in asset markets or are these longer-term 
trends?  I can imagine a low-r* world.  I can imagine a world of high asset prices, because 
you’re discounting cash flows with the lower discount rate.  I can also imagine a world, over the 
long term, of corporations taking on a lot more leverage just because debt is cheap.  I’m just 
curious—as you all look at the trends you’re seeing in asset markets in America, if you look at 
Japan, are we seeing the same trends?  Are we seeing high stock prices?  Are we seeing high 
corporate leverage because they’ve been in a low-r* world for a long time?  And does that give 
you any insight into, should we look at this as a cyclical phenomenon or just a long-term 
phenomenon of low r*? 
MS. KLEE.  Yes.  I think where we are right now—and we’re just going to talk about 
asset valuations.  Let’s look at that.  We’re at “Notable,” which is the orange color, okay?  So it’s 
not the red color.  And the level of a lot of asset prices is being pushed up by Treasury yields, 
and yet at the same time we talk about the corporate bond spread being at about the bottom third 
of the distribution.  Other risk premiums, the equity risk premium—they’re all kind of around 
that level.  So, in that sense, I believe what we’re seeing right now with the asset prices is, at 
least, cyclical, other than being pulled down at the same time by Treasury yields. 
I think in the case of Japan, their big financial crises were in the late ’90s.  They had a big 
real estate boom, and so they’ve been trying desperately to get out of that for a very long time.  
We sometimes meet with them, and they talk about the risks that they’re seeing.  They focus on 
the quantities—again, on what’s going on with financial leverage.  They see more growth in 
some of their riskier institutions, and we monitor just like they do.  In some sense, we monitor 
the asset prices, and we monitor the financial leverage.  And so right now we see resilient 
July 30-31, 2019
104 of 329


 
 
 
institutions.  That’s our structural piece.  The cyclical piece is these asset valuations that have 
gone up and down, and we do gauge them to do that. 
MR. KAMIN.  President Kashkari, just to add on to that:  Indeed, Japanese stock prices 
have actually kept better pace with U.S. stock prices than those of European stocks.  On top of 
that, we’re seeing some indications of greater reach for yield behavior by Japanese banks, 
particularly regional banks that have been plagued by poor profitability. 
So there are some signs that persistently low interest rates are leading to some reach-for-
yield behavior.  But, broadly speaking, Japan is definitely the poster boy—or girl—for low-for-
long interest rates.  And just over the course of the decades, we haven’t seen that much 
indication that those low rates are promoting financial imbalances.  In fact, this seems like the 
scarring experience of the asset bubble collapse.  It seems to have led to a very persistent 
aversion to taking a lot of risk. 
Real estate prices are still lower than I think they were in 1990.  Leverage of Japanese 
corporations is not particularly high, not particularly elevated—a lot of cash holdings by 
Japanese corporations.  So maybe in another 10 years we would see stronger evidence of reach-
for-yield, but right now it tends to be just in small pockets. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Can I just add to the example?  So they have underperformed the United 
States—I’d say, dramatically—in terms of performance over the past 10 years.  And the 
dynamism, if you look at this issue we’re worried about—lack of business dynamism—I think 
they have it there even dramatically worse than here. 
I don’t know how many initial public offerings (IPOs) there have been in Japan over the 
past two years.  They just don’t have the start-ups.  But, on the other hand, they don’t have the 
failures either.  We were talking yesterday about this.  I think it’s a different system—more 
July 30-31, 2019
105 of 329


 
 
 
controlled, more groups—but it’s an example:  sluggish growth, their price-earnings (P/E) ratios 
have gone like this, and it’s a much more sluggish economy with a lack of dynamism. 
MR. KASHKARI.  The thing I’m struggling with is, what do we define as “reach for 
yield” versus what’s just responding to the new macroworld that we’re living in?  I don’t know 
how to tell which is which.  
MR. LEHNERT.  One commonly cited difference or distinction is, you could have a set 
of firms that have made promises in terms of fixed nominal returns, like pension funds and life 
insurance companies, and those firms have an obvious incentive to gamble for life in an 
unexpectedly low, persistently low interest rate environment.  For a range of other firms, it’s 
more like their liabilities are also cheaper in a low interest rate environment.  So that’s why 
there’s this particular interest and focus on life insurance companies and pension funds and their 
behavior. 
CHAIR POWELL.  More broadly, though, doesn’t it come down to whether you think 
the sovereign yields are going to move way back up?  Obviously, if you look at the spread, it’s at 
a pretty normal level.  The equity spread looks like it’s right at its median.  And so it comes 
down to that.  If really low sovereign rates are the new normal, then equities aren’t overvalued, 
they’re right on the median.  But, of course, we don’t know that.  Is that fair to say? 
MS. KLEE.  I think so. 
MR. LEHNERT.  That’s right.  That is our story. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Okay.  President Kashkari is asking exactly the question I 
was going to ask, but I’m not thinking we’re getting answers.  So I think that the real question is, 
is the term premium unusually low?  You show charts that say it’s very low, but it could very 
well be the new normal for the term premium. 
July 30-31, 2019
106 of 329


 
 
 
I’m restating here, I guess, your point.  This is what I meant by “structural” versus 
“cyclical.”  You look at the term premium, and you say, “Well, that’s cyclically low.”  Well, 
look at the U.S. economy.  Unemployment is 3.7 percent.  You know, interest rates are 
essentially at neutral.  It’s not obvious that this is an unusual cyclical state, at least for the U.S. 
economy.  So one hypothesis is, the term premium is unusually low, it’ll get back to some new 
normal—we don’t know what that is—and that’s going to push down asset prices. 
The alternative hypothesis is, this is the new normal, given the asymmetry of risks around 
inflation, given low r* and everything we’ve been talking about.  And, therefore, even, say, a 
term premium of around zero or slightly negative supports commercial real estate, corporate 
bond yields, and asset prices more generally. 
So if I were to rephrase the last couple of questions, I would say, “How do we distinguish 
between the stories around the term premium?”  I don’t think this is at all about the equity 
market.  It’s not about the corporate bond market.  It’s actually about and has been for some time 
how do we view the U.S. Treasury securities market, the euro area, sovereign bonds, and 
everything else?  So I think that’s really where we should be focused—trying to understand that.  
Because if the term premium goes up 2 percentage points from today’s levels, that’s going to 
pull down asset prices around the world dramatically. 
MR. LEHNERT.  I don’t know if there’s a question mark at the end of that, but let me— 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  That was a statement of fact.  [Laughter]  
MR. LEHNERT.  So the one thing that we’ve pointed to over the years is, obviously, the 
hedge value of Treasury securities—an asset that goes up in price during bad times—is 
something that can explain a structural negative term premium.  And when that hedge value gets 
called into question—and there was one particular episode in early 2018 when that happened that 
July 30-31, 2019
107 of 329


 
 
 
was associated with a lot of volatility in equity markets in particular—it tends to have broad-
reaching effects on asset prices.  So I think as long as they maintain their hedge value, then, yes, 
this configuration is perfectly reasonable. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Further questions or comments for the briefers?  If not— 
MR. EVANS.  Can I ask a clarifying— 
CHAIR POWELL.  Please. 
MR. EVANS.  I wasn’t expecting Vice Chair Williams’s comment about the risk of 
increasing term permiums.  I guess— 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  No, I actually don’t expect that. 
MR. EVANS.  Well, that’s why I wasn’t expecting it, I suppose.  [Laughter] 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  No, no.  I guess it’s implicit in some of this presentation that 
the term premium is unusually low, and we would expect it to come back to a more normal level.  
It’s implicit in some— 
MS. KLEE.  I think that we cite that as a risk, not necessarily that it would happen. 
MR. EVANS.  So most of the experiences in recent years that I can think of that were 
probably disappointments as to the future path of policy, like the 2013 taper tantrum—“Oh my 
gosh, you’re not actually, as a central bank, going to follow through with all of the asset 
purchases that the markets were expecting?”—and perhaps other events.  So I guess I’m 
sympathetic to Vice Chair Williams’s perspective on that. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’m just going to add that, with so many dollars in sovereign debt 
trading at negative rates, it’s also very possible that we’re all going to continue to write down our 
estimate of the neutral rate, as we have every year for the past five years—or maybe that process 
has now ended.  But maybe not. 
July 30-31, 2019
108 of 329


 
 
 
MR. CLARIDA.  There’s a zero bound to it. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Let’s now begin the opportunity for 
comment on financial stability with President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I thank the staff for continuing to monitor 
financial stability risk, and I particularly appreciate the staff expanding the sectors it is 
monitoring, especially the unregulated sectors into which we have less insight. 
And I found the analysis of the private credit market very interesting.  While private debt 
funds and business development companies appear to rely less on leverage and don’t seem to 
pose financial stability concerns at this time, they have been one of the fastest-growing segments 
of the debt market since the financial crisis.  So I’m glad the staff is planning to continue to track 
developments there. 
High levels of corporate debt, leveraged lending, and commercial real estate valuations 
continue to pose some risks to the outlook.  Equity and corporate bond prices are near their 
historical peaks, and overall valuation risks appear to be rising.  Firms with the fastest debt 
growth have seen the greatest deterioration in indicators of their credit risk, including ratios of 
earnings to assets and cash to assets. 
The staff memo indicates there are heightened vulnerabilities in the nonfinancial 
corporate debt sector, although default rates on leveraged loans remain low.  I think these 
conditions bear watching.  Outreach to market participants identified that financial conditions 
were vulnerable to monetary policy actions perceived as less accommodative than what’s priced 
into markets and to an upside inflation surprise. 
The probability of each is not negligible.  The market has priced in more rate cuts than 
seem likely based on the previous SEP and economic outlook, and recent inflation readings have 
July 30-31, 2019
109 of 329


 
 
 
been firming a bit.  We should be prepared for some increased volatility in the markets and 
communicate our views on the outlook for monetary policy as clearly as possible.  Now, the staff 
judges the overall vulnerability of the U.S. financial system as “moderate,” and I have no reason 
to disagree at this point.  However, I continue to think we should be better prepared for how we 
would approach a situation of rising risks to financial stability.   
The summary memo indicates that, arguably, a post-crisis consensus has emerged that 
supervisory, regulatory, and macroprudential tools should be used to address financial stability 
risk, and monetary policy tools should be used to address macroeconomic stability risk.  This 
may be what’s desired, but it may not be achievable.  In addition, as the memo points out, this is 
the best strategy in some models of the economy, but not all.  In addition, we have to recognize 
that we have only a small set of macroprudential tools in the United States, consisting largely of 
the countercyclical capital buffer and the stress test.  As last year’s tabletop exercise illuminated, 
these tools are limited in their ability to control risk in an asset class or, more narrowly, at 
institutions.  In addition, the use of supervisory guidance is now more constrained, and it takes 
time to put regulations or rules in place. 
All of this suggests that in order to control risks to financial stability, we may need to do 
more to ensure the structural resilience of the financial system across the business and financial 
cycles with stronger capital and liquidity requirements, be more willing to use the 
countercyclical tools at early signs of emerging financial stability risk, and recognize that 
monetary policy may need to help contain financial stability risk, at least in some cases.  I think 
it behooves us to discuss and reach some consensus on how we should balance our financial 
stability and macrostability responsibilities and how we would use supervisory and 
macroprudential tools and monetary policy to foster these objectives. 
July 30-31, 2019
110 of 329


 
 
 
Now, as our framework discussion just underscored, we have a lesson from the financial 
crisis and the Great Recession that the lower bound really poses challenges for us, and we may 
be in a new normal with a low r*.  I think the other things we learned from that period included 
how important financial stability is and the fact that we now have much more interconnectedness 
in global financial markets.  And I think we need to take that seriously as well.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  A financial stability concern that I’m 
watching closely is the development of co-working models in many major urban office markets.  
The co-working model is currently employed by a variety of companies, but probably the best-
known company in the space is WeWork.  Though co-working still represents a small proportion 
of the total size of the CRE office segment, it is growing rapidly.  It is growing particularly 
quickly in major cities around the world, including Shanghai, London, and New York, such that 
WeWork is now estimated to be the largest private office tenant in Manhattan. 
What makes this development a potential financial stability risk is twofold.  Co-working 
companies that enter into long-term leases with the property owners have tended to re-lease to 
smaller-sized and less-mature companies on a shorter-term basis.  This is a segment of the 
economy likely to be particularly susceptible to an economic downturn, potentially resulting in 
office vacancies rising more quickly than they have historically.  Thus, in a downturn, WeWork 
would be exposed to the loss of tenant income, which puts both them and the property owner at 
risk if WeWork can not make its own lease payments to the owner. 
A second reason for concern is that companies such as WeWork have created bankruptcy 
remote SPV lease structures.  This structure allows the SPV of the co-working company to walk 
July 30-31, 2019
111 of 329


 
 
 
away from unprofitable lease arrangements in an economic downturn without the property owner 
having recourse to the ultimate parent, the co-working company. 
The fact that the WeWork model relies on small-company tenants with short-term leases, 
combined with a lack of recourse for the property owner that WeWork leases from, raises the 
issue of whether bank loans to property owners in cities with major penetration by co-working 
models could experience a higher incidence of default and greater loss given default than we 
have seen historically. 
The potential for increased losses accruing to property owners comes not just from the 
limited liability arising from the SPV structure, but also from the change in the composition of 
tenants.  The WeWork model opens the door for smaller and riskier firms that may be less able 
to survive a downturn to become tenants.  The introduction and growth of the co-working model 
captures the owner–tenant structure in a way that may not be adequately captured in a stress test 
focused on historical relationships. 
At the stress-testing conference in Boston, Mark Flannery suggested stressing parameter 
values in the default and loss given default equations in addition to economic variables.  Such a 
strategy might be particularly relevant for the commercial real estate space in major U.S. cities 
that have become more dependent on co-working models, as these models may be less resilient 
to a downturn than more traditional office space.  The risk is augmented by the fact that it may 
occur at a time when office capitalization rates are unusually low and valuations are unusually 
high for office space.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  In preparing my earlier remarks, I anticipated that, 
even for myself, I might be going longer than normal.  So I decided to put something off until 
July 30-31, 2019
112 of 329


 
 
 
this intervention [laughter] related to the framework and financial stability.  I’ve already 
mentioned this—let me just second President Mester’s comment that I think it would be very 
useful to have a longer discussion about the interaction between financial stability issues and our 
monetary policy framework.  I have to say, I was very heartened to hear Chair Powell indicate 
that nonmonetary policy tools surely seem better to address financial instability risks rather than 
give up on our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. 
At times, we have talked about the potential that we might have to tighten the funds rate 
even when it might not be the best time, in terms of the economy.  Back in 2013, at least, we 
discussed that, and everybody sort of indicated that that wouldn’t be the right way to go, which I 
think you always end up with. 
Doing this in terms of the framework would be helpful, and I was heartened to hear about 
the listing of higher through-the-cycle capital—the countercyclical capital buffer presumably 
could be part of that—and how that could interact with our cyclical monetary policy 
responsibilities.  So I look forward to hearing more about that in some discussions.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Just one quick point.  As I read through and reflected on this morning’s 
conversation and the one we’re likely to have tomorrow, I note that the financial stability 
assessment is a static look.  It’s what it looks like today.  We talk a lot about potential risk to 
financial stability caused in low-rate environments, and I’d be curious whether you have the 
capability and, potentially, whether you have the interest in taking more of a forward-looking 
dynamic look at these risks.  I’d at least find that modeling useful. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
July 30-31, 2019
113 of 329


 
 
 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Chair.  First I’d like to thank the staff for their work on the 
QS assessment.  I always find that to be a very interesting and useful tool.  But my remarks today 
will focus on what’s referred to as “private credit,” or lending by nonbanks.  This credit is 
advanced by private equity firms through private credit funds, which obtain funding from 
insurance companies, pension funds, and other investors. 
Private credit overall has been increasing in recent years and is now estimated at about 
$900 billion, compared to the institutional leveraged lending market of about $1.2 billion.  No, 
wait—sorry.  Is that right? 
MR. QUARLES.  Trillion. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Trillion.  Thank you.  We know much less about it because of its 
limited relationship with the banking sector. 
Private credit funds are also relatively new entrants to the lending market, so their 
performance is much less understood.  During the previous recession, the private credit market 
was about one-third the size of today’s market, with slightly higher credit losses than leveraged 
lending.  It follows, then, that this credit also tends to be extended to riskier borrowers—that is, 
firms with higher debt relative to assets or earnings ratios. 
From a financial stability perspective, private credit funds may pose a lesser risk than 
banks because they tend to be less interconnected with other financial institutions.  That said, 
private credit funds do compete with large regional banks, and yet they’re not subject to the same 
degree of regulatory and compliance scrutiny and requirements. 
Since the financial crisis, we’ve seen significant migration from banks to nonbanks in the 
area of residential mortgages, where now about half of all mortgages are originated by nonbanks.  
July 30-31, 2019
114 of 329


 
 
 
Private credit composes a smaller, though rising, share of agricultural credit, and it seems that 
there may be similar trends in business credit more broadly. 
My interest today is more specific and focused on lending to agricultural producers, an 
area where generations of relationship lending has traditionally been important.  Through many 
cycles—some lengthy and very stressful—banks have relied on a deep understanding of 
agricultural production, particularly when they have geographic proximity and local knowledge.  
Currently, total farm debt in the United States is about $400 billion, with about two-thirds 
backed by agricultural real estate.  And 45 percent of agricultural lending is made by the Farm 
Credit System, which is a GSE, and 40 percent by commercial banks.  Nonbanks make up the 
balance of 15 percent, a portion of which is private credit. 
In comparison to banks, private equity funds tend to be more focused on loans to riskier 
businesses for a higher yield.  This additional credit source could be contributing to the elevated 
land prices we’ve seen in the agricultural markets for the past 10 years.  Should agricultural land 
prices decline, this could lead to insufficient debt collateralization for both banks and nonbanks, 
potentially creating significant issues for financial institutions. 
In my view, an important risk associated with the entrance of these private credit firms is 
the durability of their presence.  They’ve not yet been tested by a major and prolonged 
agricultural downturn.  Experience suggests that these downturns can last multiple years before a 
recovery, requiring patience on the part of lenders.  Should private credit funds prove prone to 
liquidate and move out when, inevitably, times get tough, the resulting additional contraction in 
credit supply could significantly deepen an agricultural downturn. 
The good news is that private equity funds are closed end and have stable long-term 
funding from investors, so run risk appears limited.  These funds also do not appear to rely much 
July 30-31, 2019
115 of 329


 
 
 
on borrowing to fund their lending.  About half of the funds borrow from large banks.  It also 
bears repeating that, so far, this is a small fraction of the wider agricultural market.  But, overall, 
I found the focus on private credit in the QS assessment very interesting this round, and I look 
forward to learning more about these issues in coming months.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Well, the comments so far have been quite 
interesting—new takes on things.  And all I’ve got is the same old, same old [laughter], but I will 
go through it anyway.  I’ll have a few comments on overall financial stability and how I think we 
should think about that, discuss a few things I think we’ve learned from the stress tests, both the 
most recent round and then over the course of the whole past decade, and wrap up with a few 
thoughts on the countercyclical capital buffer. 
So, overall, I think what we heard today is that the macrofinancial picture seems maybe a 
little “frothy” but not really out of line with this stage of the business cycle.  The financial 
system is quite resilient, though, and that has led the staff—and I completely agree with them—
to conclude that overall vulnerabilities facing the financial system are moderate.  So, key areas of 
concern:  The low level of Treasury yields may be holding up the level of asset prices across a 
range of markets.  That creates the potential for a snapback.  We’ve had the back-and-forth as to, 
how great actually is that potential for a snapback?  It would seem to be quite unlikely at the 
present moment, given monetary policy here and abroad, generally quiescent inflation, and how 
long the period with low term premiums has lasted.  We can have a longer discussion about that, 
but, certainly, the near-term risk of that snapback seems to be small. 
The rising level of prime money market fund assets under management—that’s 
something that we want to keep our eye on.  The level of prime funds is back to nearly half of 
July 30-31, 2019
116 of 329


 
 
 
what it was at the beginning of 2016.  Business borrowing—which is something we’ve talked a 
lot about here, and it is talked about in a lot of forums—is cheap and continues to expand at a 
steady clip, particularly leveraged loans.  Now, our available information suggests that the 
funding structures that support the holdings of those leveraged loans, such as collateralized loan 
obligations (CLOs), are stable, but the big “but” here is that that assessment relies on what it is 
that we can see, and most of what we can see is information from the largest domestic banks.  
And, obviously, I think we should be worried about the part of the market that we can’t see.  So 
the obvious potential is that CLOs could themselves have stable funding, but the holders of 
exposure to those CLOs could be runnable institutions. 
I think in either the last meeting or the meeting before, President Rosengren raised the 
example of Norinchukin Bank with a significant amount of exposure to CLOs.  So at the 
Financial Stability Board, as many of you might know, we have established a project for this 
year of examining globally where the risk to financial stability from leveraged lending could 
arise and who are the global holders exposure principally to these CLOs.  The idea is that putting 
together this information from a broad range of jurisdictions and from a broad range of 
regulatory sources within those jurisdictions will give us insight that, at the moment, we can’t 
really have from what it is that we know. 
Just as a modest preview, I think we’ve all heard a lot that there may be risks from the 
exposure of Japanese banks, although that exposure tends to be to the top credit tranche.  The 
Japanese will tell you in self-defense that non-Japan Asia has a significantly large exposure and 
concentrated much lower in the credit stack in the CLOs, and maybe that should be something 
we should look at.  In any event, this should be done in the fall.  I’m sure you will all pore over it 
obsessively, but the idea is that we really need to look at this from a global perspective, and we 
July 30-31, 2019
117 of 329


 
 
 
can’t just let it be.  But even with those concerns, our financial institutions—and, particularly, 
our largest banks—are extremely, extremely resilient, and the confidence in that stems in part 
from the scrutiny that they receive as part of the stress-testing program, both recently and over 
time. 
In June we released last year’s stress-test results.  They show that the financial system 
remains resilient, that capital planning by banks continues to improve.  The largest and most 
complex banks were tested against a severe hypothetical recession on perhaps the most 
consequential measure:  the rapid fall in employment, or a rise in the unemployment rate.  That, 
for obvious reasons, was going to be tougher this year than it was last year and than it has ever 
been.  And they still had strong capital levels up to the test, well above their minimum 
requirements.  Additionally, virtually all of the firms—in fact, all but one, and that was a pretty 
close call among the staff making the assessment—met the high expectations that we’ve set on 
the quality of their capital planning, taking into account their specific risks and vulnerabilities. 
So, overall, those results are good news.  They confirm that the financial system is 
significantly stronger than before the crisis.  And then soon after the release of those 
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) results, President Rosengren and the 
Boston Fed graciously hosted our centerpiece stress-testing conference, and the theme of that 
conference was on the lessons learned over the past decade—not just the most recent stress test, 
but what have we learned from stress testing.  And one lesson that I thought was particularly 
useful was on the importance of the stress test in leaning against the pro-cyclicality of bank 
capital. 
As we all know, when times are good, banks become more comfortable with loan quality.  
Consequently, they don’t build as much capital over their minimums as they might in less 
July 30-31, 2019
118 of 329


 
 
 
complacent times.  The stress tests push against that tendency by building in increasingly 
stringent macroeconomic scenarios as the economy improves.  That’s almost an automatic 
stabilizer-type consequence, given the framework in which we create those scenarios.  And 
papers at the conference highlighted that lesson, including one by former Fed denizens Don 
Kohn and Nellie Liang.  And that feature of bank behavior is also one of the reasons why the 
Basel III reforms recommended establishing another countercyclical capital tool, the 
countercyclical capital buffer, or CCyB. 
What I wanted to end with are some remarks on the overlap that exists between the goals 
of the CCyB and the goals of the stress tests.  In many ways, I think the two can and probably 
have to work together.  Nellie and Don’s paper flagged the potential for stress tests to lead to an 
unwanted and potentially sharp tightening in capital requirements in the midst of a moderate 
recession.  So, given that, the CCyB offers an elegant complement to the stress test by creating 
the possibility of a layer of capital that could be turned down to support lending through that type 
of a stress period or a moderate downturn. 
On the other hand, some object and say that that use of the countercyclical capital buffer 
is going to be limited.  You won’t be able to turn it off, because markets wouldn’t permit it.  You 
know, that’s the very moment when markets are going to insist that banks preserve their capital.  
Whatever the regulators would allow, the markets won’t allow banks to reduce capital.  But the 
stress tests and their transparency should help assure market participants of the size of the 
exposures and of the solvency of the banks and thus allow the turning-down of that 
countercyclical capital buffer.  That’s certainly how the countercyclical capital buffer has 
worked in jurisdictions that have turned it on and turned it off.  Again, the principal example of 
that is Britain in connection with all the anticipation around Brexit:  They’ve turned it on, and 
July 30-31, 2019
119 of 329


 
 
 
they’ve turned it off.  They have been able to do that.  For that reason, I’d be in favor of 
incorporating features of the CCyB into the stress capital buffer and vice versa.  But a difficulty 
arises in the fact that I think the assessment of financial stability that we’ve had from the staff 
here would lead us to conclude that we effectively have already turned on our CCyB with the 
ample structural buffers that we have. 
So what do I mean by that?  We’ve seen and we were briefed today on examples of 
concerns about financial stability, including stretched asset valutions and concerns about 
maturity transformation.  If you go back to the overall purpose of the countercyclical capital 
buffer, it is that, as concerns about financial stability grow, we would increase the capital levels 
of the financial institutions that we regulate in order to bring our overall assessment of financial 
stability risk back down to something that’s moderate, that’s not meaningfully above normal.  
And in all the assessments of financial stability that we have talked about around this table, that 
we talk about at the Board, we have seen these increases in asset prices.  We’ve seen increases in 
concerns in others areas about financial stability.  And when we come to leverage in the financial 
sector, that basically swamps everything, and we say, okay, concerns are not meaningfully above 
normal.  They are only moderate because leverage in the financial sector is so low, which is 
another way of saying that the purpose of the countercyclical capital buffer has already been 
achieved.  The capital that we would have added through the countercyclical capital buffer we 
already have, and the problem with that is that now we don’t have anything to turn down in the 
event of a business cycle because we did that through our stable capital levels. 
One option would be to meld the two buffers to adjust the normal level of the CCyB from 
zero to a percentage of risk-weighted assets so that it is on generally and to take some slice of 
our current capital levels and to turn that into countercyclical capital buffer or a flexible layer of 
July 30-31, 2019
120 of 329


 
 
 
capital—which is similar to what many of you know that the Bank of England has done and, in 
fact, is aggressively trying to increase, moving to having as much as 2 to 3 percentage points of 
their total capital levels be this flexible layer of capital that they could turn down and then call 
that the countercyclical capital buffer.  By doing that, I think we’d be able to simplify our capital 
requirements but continue to retain both through-the-cycle resilience and countercyclical buffers 
and, indeed, recognize what it is that it seems that we have done by our constant assessment of 
financial stability risks as moderate, even in the face of potentially growing risks. 
The alternative of turning the countercyclical capital buffer on without making that 
adjustment—particularly if some of the discussion we’ve had about a secular decline in interest 
rates driven by a long-term lower r* supporting asset prices is the case, we may not be in that 
much financial stability risk anyway—would result in us incurring the diminution of the capacity 
of the financial sector to support economic growth by increasing its capital levels without any 
attendant financial stability compensation because the risks may not, in fact, be that high.  Or if, 
in fact, this is something that will adjust itself and is cyclical, since we already have quite high 
capital levels—effectively, the countercyclical capital buffer is “on,” in my view—we could 
drive activity out of the resilient part of the financial system and more into the area of private 
credit business development corporations that are less resilient and into which we have less 
visibility.  Do we really want to do that, given where we are?  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  We have several interventions left, and we’re past coffee 
break time.  So I’m going to say let’s have our coffee break now, and we will start again at 3:25 
sharp, by that clock.  Thank you very much. 
[Coffee break] 
July 30-31, 2019
121 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  All right.  Thanks, everyone.  We’ll pick it up again with President 
George. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Governor Quarles, I am 
going to continue on a familiar theme, although perhaps with a different take.  [Laughter]  With 
the easing of credit conditions since the beginning of the year, the profitability outlook for U.S.  
G-SIBs, especially in terms of their interest income, suggests these banks are likely to pursue 
riskier strategies to generate revenue to offset a slowdown or contraction in interest income. 
As the quantitative surveillance (QS) report observes, credit quality for recent issuance of 
corporate institutional loans continues to decline.  As these banks reach for other and perhaps 
riskier sources of income, you can see them ramping up the volumes of leveraged loans that end 
up on the books of nonbank entities, such as CLOs.  As CLOs manufacture triple-A rated 
products from the speculative-grade loans, the banks generate fee income, and fund managers 
enjoy higher yields, reinforcing incentives to generate an increasingly larger share of these 
riskier loans.  Although the QS report concludes this vulnerability is not out of bounds yet, these 
strategies are in play, as capital levels for the largest banks are declining.  As Elizabeth noted, 
payout ratios of Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs), which are already above 100 
percent, are expected to increase based on the capital plans approved in CCAR.  And G-SIBs 
have publicly announced that they are likely to raise payouts, lowering their common equity 
targets 100 to 300 basis points. 
Historically, the combination of growing risk incentives with declining capital levels has 
not turned out well.  Perhaps this time is different, but I find it concerning.  As the Committee 
contemplates a more accommodative policy stance, it will be relying on assessments that these 
July 30-31, 2019
122 of 329


 
 
 
reduced levels of capital, in the face of growing risk, are sufficiently robust to withstand stress 
and continue to lend at the next turn of the credit cycle.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.  
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  Conditions today provide a classic environment for 
reach-for-yield behavior and increases in risky debt, and, of course, that is what we are seeing.  
Valuations in equity and corporate bond markets are near historic peaks.  Commercial real estate 
prices are also elevated, and commercial real estate (CRE) capitalization rates remain very low 
by historical standards.  Valuation pressures in the leveraged loan market are elevated, with 
nonprice terms particularly generous recently, and corporate-sector debt is at or near a historical 
high, whether measured relative to nominal GDP or to the book value of assets. 
Moreover, the latest data suggest corporate debt continues to grow rapidly for the riskiest 
firms.  While there has been some slowing in leveraged loan issuance recently, there has instead 
been a compensating increase in issuance of high-yield and unrated bonds.  In this kind of 
environment, when it is relatively cheap to build capital by retaining earnings and when 
exposures to future risks are rising, classic macroprudential policy would call for capital ratios to 
be rising.  Instead—and here my comments will echo President George’s—the capital ratios at 
the largest banks are falling notably. 
Under the rigors of the stress-testing regime and other regulatory requirements that 
prevailed from 2014 to 2016, the eight largest banks that pose the greatest risk to the system 
limited their payouts to less than 60 percent of earnings, on average, thereby building their 
capital buffers relative to risk assets from about 11.6 percent of tier 1 capital to 12.9 percent 
common equity tier 1 capital going into the 2017 stress test.  Over the previous two years, 
payouts have been permitted to rise well above 100 percent of earnings, on average, and capital 
July 30-31, 2019
123 of 329


 
 
 
ratios have already declined from 12.9 percent to 12.2 percent.  This year, the largest firms 
announced nearly $120 billion in planned share buybacks and plans to increase dividends.   
If earnings hold steady at last year’s levels, those increased distributions would represent 
a payout ratio significantly in excess of 100 percent and would further deplete capital ratios back 
down to about 11.5 percent, back down to the starting ratios in 2014.  If earnings are weaker, 
capital ratios could decline by more.  History suggests that as the business cycle proceeds, both 
market participants and regulators become increasingly complacent.  We are seeing complacency 
currently among market participants, as reflected in high asset prices, weak lending standards, 
and a tendency to favor riskier forms of lending.  As regulators, we should be wary of falling into 
that same pattern. 
With the cycle well extended, a countercyclical approach to capital regulation would 
suggest that current levels of capital should be above their historical average, and they should 
have been rising, not falling, over the past few years of solid growth and financial market gains.  
Capital could then be released if the economy were to deteriorate, relieving what might 
otherwise be a constraint on bank lending.  That raises the question whether current capital levels 
at the large banks, which are moving down to the 11.5 percent range, are indeed above the 
desired through-the-cycle average level of capital.  Board staff research assessing both the costs 
and benefits found that regulatory capital ratios should be in the range of 13 to 25 percent on 
average.  Other research has come to similar, or in some cases higher, levels. 
Current capital ratios are currently below the lower end of that range and are headed 
lower, so if anything, we should be looking for ways to raise bank capital standards, not lower 
them.  It is sometimes argued that our capital standards should be lower to improve 
competitiveness with foreign banks, but U.S. banks are healthier, more profitable, and more 
July 30-31, 2019
124 of 329


 
 
 
competitive than their foreign competitors.  Moreover, regulatory discrepancies may legitimately 
reflect different degrees of willingness to provide government bailouts. 
In the United States, post-crisis statutory changes clearly require regulation to be 
calibrated to avoid taxpayers again being put at risk by severe stress at a large bank.  As I 
implied in our framework discussion, getting macroprudential policy right is crucial to meeting 
our dual-mandate goals.  If the past three recessions are any guide, it is financial imbalances 
rather than price inflation that tend to pose the greatest risk to the expansion and so, therefore, it 
is key to achieving our monetary policy goals that the banking system remain well capitalized 
and that, as regulators, we resist the complacency that history suggests tends to accompany a 
strong economy. 
Finally, President Barkin suggested that our QS should be looking at risks in a forward-
looking and dynamic framework.  Certainly, in my capacity as chair of the Board’s Financial 
Stability Committee, I very much share that view, and I know the staff does as well.  One of the 
most promising avenues for that work that we have been talking about is to use our stress-testing 
machinery to analyze some of these financial risks in forward-looking scenario analysis that isn’t 
prescriptive for purposes of capital planning but is, instead, oriented simply to informing our 
own internal thinking.  And I think that arena has great promise.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll just briefly comment.  I often use the 
term “excesses and imbalances” and talk of worries about that.  And I will just clarify, here’s 
what I’m referring to when I use that term.  In a low-rate but dynamic economy, where there is 
not a great limit to people’s desire and ability and motivation to make money—in many cases, 
personally make money—if it goes on long enough, it can lead to behavior that is hard to manage 
July 30-31, 2019
125 of 329


 
 
 
when a downturn occurs.  And I’m not referring to stock market valuations when I talk about 
this.  Yes, price-earnings ratios (P/E’s) are going up.  Last year we had P/E contraction; this year 
we have P/E expansion.  If you had a selloff in the stock market, it might even be a healthy thing.  
That’s really not what I’m looking at.  What we’ve been talking to, and others are referring to, 
are record levels of corporate debt to GDP.  I wrote an essay on this in the fall, and before this 
meeting I checked:  Corporate debt to GDP is higher as a percentage than it was when I wrote 
the essay—a tripling in triple-B rated debt, dramatic growth in leveraged loans, as well as high-
yield debt. 
President Rosengren talked about real estate, real estate capitalization rates, and what’s 
going on in that market.  A lot of this is being driven, in fairness, by mergers, share repurchases, 
and a historically high level of activism, in which the typical page of the activist playbook says, 
you know, buy back your stock, create earnings per share accretion.  It makes sense with a 
historically low level of rates.  The cost of debt is cheap.  What I’m more worried about, though, 
recently—and Governor Bowman mentioned—is acceleration in the growth of these private 
entities, usually P/E-sponsored, nonbank vehicles.  And the reason I’m worried about them is, 
they are either going public, or they’re being created in multibillion-dollar size.  And they are 
creating access to smaller companies to get debt. 
Some of these companies might not be able to get sizable bank debt, but—and I’ve 
looked at the list of names, and I mentioned it yesterday, of these business development 
corporations, or BDCs.  I just don’t recognize a lot of the companies.  And when you look at the 
sizes, they are mid-cap companies.  They are borrowing second lien debt at LIBOR plus 800 
basis points.  And you might say, who would borrow second lien debt today at LIBOR plus 800 
basis points?  But there are a sizable number of companies out there doing it.  Eight-year final 
July 30-31, 2019
126 of 329


 
 
 
maturity, prepayable annually.  And so what strikes me—and I’ll get to what I think we ought to 
do about it—what we’re setting up for is, we’re going to get to a point where we’re going to have 
a greater slowing in the future at some point.  You’ll have a credit spread widening.  It’s not that 
these companies may not be able to support this debt.  It’s when it comes time to refinance, they 
are going to have a refinancing issue.  You could easily have challenged market liquidity.  You’ll 
have a credit crunch.  And as we’ve said before, it will amplify a slowing.  But as it builds, the 
degree of amplification is heading higher, not lower. 
It strikes me, if the music stopped today, I think we’d have a challenging situation to deal 
with, but I’m more worried about what happens from here.  And building on what President 
Barkin said and what Governor Brainard said, it’s what happens next that worries me more.  And 
so I think we’ve got a great team, and I appreciate the work our QS team is doing on this.  But I 
would be watching very, very carefully for what’s happening in terms of new developments with 
BDCs.  And I think you mentioned it, Governor Bowman did, and we’ve looked.  There is not 
great information on BDCs.  There is great information on CLOs, and I actually think that is a 
pretty good structure.  Not great information on BDCs. 
We had a direct talk with the rating agencies, and it was alarming.  They gave us a range 
of their estimate of the size of the market—$300 billion to $900 billion—in other words, not a 
great feel for it, and I can understand now why.  But to the extent we have great information-
gathering ability, if we could look more at these BDCs, who are they lending to and any other 
new vehicle developments—again, I think it’s what happens from here that we’re going to look 
back a few years from now and regret. 
In that context, back to macroprudential options, I do think any one of our decisions in 
isolation seems like it makes sense.  But looking at macroprudential—that is, bank regulation—
July 30-31, 2019
127 of 329


 
 
 
in the context of all of these other developments, I would love to step back and just say, you 
know, are there other macroprudential options we should be thinking about for the banks, in light 
of all of these other developments going on broadly in the financial system as it relates to debt 
and debt buildup? 
I just think it would be a healthy exercise, and we’re probably at the point now in the 
cycle where we should be at the edge of our seats.  If we were vigilant before, we should be 
extremely vigilant from here.  And, if nothing comes of it, I will be the first to apologize for 
annoying everyone.  But I think we should have heightened vigilance from now on, because I 
think these risks are building.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the things I thought was really 
interesting in our framework discussion this morning was the intersection with financial stability.  
I’m glad that it came up as robustly as it did.  It’s very important.  I continue to think that 
monetary policy is a poor tool to use to lean against rising asset prices, because the costs to Main 
Street are too high.  But if the largest banks’ capital levels continue to fall and if our tools that 
are specifically designed to enhance financial stability weaken, then even I would need to 
consider using monetary policy, if that’s the only tool we have available.  I certainly hope it 
doesn’t come to that, because I think we’d be prioritizing Wall Street over Main Street in that 
scenario. 
Many people over the years have talked about the countercyclical capital buffer.  It’s 
never been activated.  From what I understand, when it was designed, it was supposed to be on 
one-third of the time, and it has not yet been activated.  And the stress tests are becoming easier.  
As others have noted, the large banks are now paying out more than their earnings, and capital 
July 30-31, 2019
128 of 329


 
 
 
levels are falling, which is the exact wrong direction.  I totally echo what Governor Brainard 
said.  Our analysis in Minneapolis echoes other independent analyses that, to protect taxpayers, 
the optimal level of capital is substantially higher than the capital levels that the banks have 
today. 
The overall QS assessment of vulnerabilities facing the financial system is yellow, not 
red, is based in large part, I think, on the notion that the banks have more capital and liquidity 
than before the crisis, so the banks are considered green.  But if you go back and reassess, are the 
banks really green?  And if not, thenis the overall QS assessment really yellow?  I don’t think the 
banks are really green.  I think the banks are something south of green, and that would suggest 
the QS report should be red.  And that would point to then activating the countercyclical capital 
buffer.  So, to me, the standard of “Are the banks stronger than they were before the crisis?” is a 
false standard.  There should be more of an absolute judgment.  And on an absolute measure, I 
think the evidence is, they are not strong enough. 
I am concerned about the transparency of the stress tests.  You know, we have seen this 
movie over and over again.  When dollars are on the line, people will seek to game the tests or 
outright cheat.  Think about Volkswagen.  Volkswagen literally programmed their cars to detect 
when they were in an emissions test and to then automatically change their engine behavior to 
lower their power output and reduce emissions.  And then, once the test was over, the cars 
reverted back to their polluting, full-power ways.  So they literally changed the dynamics when 
they were in the test.  This is not dissimilar to banks buying options to hedge their investment 
portfolios during stress tests when they know the stress scenario in advance, only to allow those 
hedges to expire after the test.  It makes them look safer, and then we will allow them to pay out 
July 30-31, 2019
129 of 329


 
 
 
more capital.  And we know that some banks have been doing this.  And, by the way, the 
Volkswagen executives are going to jail for this behavior. 
So, on the basis of our discussion, it is clear that there is a lot we don’t know about asset 
prices, yields, spreads, term premiums, and what is an imbalance versus what is simply a 
repricing in a low-r* environment.  There is a lot we don’t know.  Given these uncertainties, I 
think we should err on the side of making sure that big banks are safe, and that means making 
sure that they have enough capital if bad things happen.  We know how to do this, and we have 
the tools to do it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thanks.  More comments on financial stability?  Seeing none, why 
don’t we go right into the economy go-round, beginning with President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  At the previous FOMC meeting, I was 
concerned that trade and geopolitical uncertainties would become a reality by the time of this 
meeting.  Fortunately, that did not occur.  The outcome from side meetings of the G-20 was as 
good as could be expected.  No additional tariffs were levied, and an agreement was made to 
resume negotiations.  While the outcome of trade talks remains uncertain and is clearly a 
headwind for global growth and business fixed investment, this uncertainty is largely being 
offset by other factors.  Thus, despite these headwinds, the Tealbook sees global real GDP 
growth picking up to 2.2 percent in the second half of the year before rising to 2.5 percent in the 
following two years. 
The effect of tariffs on trade is one part of the outlook.  We should ask whether trade 
headwinds are large enough to depress the overall outlook.  At the time of the previous meeting, 
the Tealbook expected U.S. real GDP growth of 1.8 percent in the second quarter.  The actual 
number, as you know, was 2.1 percent, bolstered by very strong consumption that offset 
July 30-31, 2019
130 of 329


 
 
 
weakness in the foreign sector and business fixed investment.  Thus, despite the trade-related 
headwinds, the economy so far continues to grow faster than potential, consistent with a 
somewhat lower unemployment rate next year. 
Another potential headwind to growth this year was the uncertainty around the likelihood 
of reaching agreement on the debt ceiling and the federal budget.  As we have learned, 
government shutdowns can be quite disruptive and threaten to undermine business and 
household confidence.  However, with the recent agreement, it looks like these concerns have 
been postponed through the end of next year, reducing some of the near-term fiscal uncertainty.  
These improved outcomes are reflected in some measures of uncertainty.  The VIX measure of 
stock market volatility is not particularly elevated and lies well below the peaks that occurred at 
the end of last year.  Credit spreads, which can reflect concerns about the potential for a 
recession, are also not elevated and remain below the levels reached at the end of last year. 
A third measure of uncertainty may be found in the probability distributions for real GDP 
outcomes provided by the Survey of Professional Forecasters.  These distributions have not 
shifted significantly lately, unlike in the past periods of heightened uncertainty, such as 
following the stock market crash of October ’87 or the 9/11 attacks.  One reason that uncertainty 
measures may have remained relatively calm of late is the expectation of a lower federal funds 
rate, but the G-20 meeting outcome and the string of positive data we have received since our 
June meeting were also important. 
The June employment report showed an increase of 224,000 jobs that more than offset 
the weakness in the May report and resulted in a very healthy 171,000 jobs created on average 
over the past three months.  Consumer spending was particularly robust in the second quarter.  
While the June Tealbook had assumed consumption would grow at 3 percent, the advance report 
July 30-31, 2019
131 of 329


 
 
 
for the second quarter showed a much stronger 4.3 percent.  Most of the data on inflation have 
also surprised on the upside.  The core CPI inflation rate was higher than expected.  Last week’s 
core PCE price data showed inflation firming, and the Dallas Fed’s PCE trimmed-mean estimate 
remained steady at 2 percent. 
In addition, my staff has done some work looking at the weighted median PCE measure 
of inflation.  This alternative gauge of inflation ranks the percentage change in 211 subindexes of 
PCE inflation and uses as the median the percentage change of the subindex at the 
50th percentile of cumulated consumption weights.  An error-correction model suggests this 
monthly median PCE inflation measure is a good predictor of future total and core PCE 
measures.  Currently, the median PCE is above 2 percent and it has been rising over the past 
couple of years.  Thus, readings on median PCE prices and the Dallas trimmed-mean inflation 
measure are consistent with total and core PCE inflation being weighed down temporarily by 
subindexes that are particularly affected by changes in the calculation of some price indexes or 
technology innovations.  Such changes would presumably be less persistent and thus less 
indicative of underlying inflation trends. 
Corroborating these statistical measures of underlying inflation, the Tealbook forecast 
indicates that core PCE inflation will be just under 2 percent by the end of the year.  Altogether, 
this evidence is consistent with the recent weakness in total and core PCE inflation being 
transitory and not a more worrisome and persistent miss below our target.  I place less emphasis 
on TIPS-based inflation measures than other members of the Committee.  But measures of 
forward and average inflation calculated from TIPS and the Michigan survey of inflation 
expectations have all firmed over the past month, consistent with the generally firming inflation 
data.  Furthermore, I find it difficult to calibrate monetary policy to react strongly to relatively 
July 30-31, 2019
132 of 329


 
 
 
small changes in estimates of the underlying expectation of inflation.  Finally, I would add that 
stock indexes and measures of nonfinancial debt to GDP are near all-time highs.  Stock indexes 
are up significantly from both the start of the year and from the June meeting.  Stoking asset 
valuations at the top of the valuation cycle is likely to lead to larger losses whenever these 
exuberant expectations are no longer ratified.  I will talk more about my financial stability 
concerns tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  With Friday’s release of the Q2 GDP data, 
we learned that the economy in the first half of the year grew 2.6 percent.  Year-to-date, the 
unemployment rate has averaged 3.8 percent and remains near its lowest level in 50 years.  
Wages have been rising broadly in line with productivity and prices but, if anything, have 
recently been surprising on the downside—for example, average hourly earnings.  Thus, the data 
simply do not signal the rising cost-push pressure that we would expect to see if the labor market 
were overheating.  Notwithstanding strong growth and low unemployment, core PCE is running 
at 1.6 percent on a June-over-June basis or 1.5 percent on a Q2-over-Q2 basis.  So U.S. price 
pressures remain muted, and various measures of expected inflation continue to reside at the 
lower end of a range that I myself consider consistent with our objective. 
Since our June meeting, the U.S. economic data have been coming in at or even above 
expectations, and the staff in the July Tealbook accordingly revised up its estimate of first-half 
growth.  So it’s tempting to extrapolate these pleasant surprises into the future and to revise 
upward projections of U.S. activity, and the staff did that to some extent.  They now show 
second-half growth running at 1.9 percent, roughly in line with trend, but I would point out that 
if that materializes, it would represent a slowdown from the recent pace of activity.  While 
July 30-31, 2019
133 of 329


 
 
 
consumption growth is likely to continue to support economic expansion, given elevated 
uncertainties about the ultimate outcome of trade negotiations and the marking down of global 
growth prospects, capital spending and exports have been and are likely to remain a headwind 
for growth.  Now, on inflation, the staff projects second-half core PCE inflation running at 
1.8 percent by the end of the year, and eventually, in later years, they do expect core inflation to 
edge up to 1.9 percent.  But I do think there are some risks to that outlook, and I’ll talk about that 
in a moment. 
I would cite three factors that continue to give me some cause for concern about the 
balance of risks for the outlook, especially the outlook for inflation.  Let me talk about the global 
economy.  Our mandate is U.S. employment and price stability, but we’re part of a global 
economy, and that is a factor in our thinking about the outlook.  And I must say that the outlook 
for the global economy continues to be marked down in the Tealbook and by outside forecasters.  
Sluggish global growth is a headwind for exports, and this is evident in the just-released GDP 
data, which show that, over the most recent four quarters, real exports have actually declined 
about 2 percent.  It’s actually unusual for real exports to decline outside of recessions—the past 
two times it happened were in 2016 and 1998.  So, again, a slowdown for activity there. 
As we’ve mentioned, persistent uncertainty about the outcome of trade negotiations 
cannot be a positive for business investment.  Business fixed investment continues to be either 
flat or negative, and the staff sees no pickup in the second half of the year.  In response to this 
evident loss of global growth momentum, year-to-date, a dozen or so central banks around the 
world have eased policy or, like the ECB this week, have signaled a clear intention to ease 
policy.  On this point, let me be clear and more direct than I can be outside of this room.  We 
operate in an integrated global capital market.  Policy rates are low globally and are being cut in 
July 30-31, 2019
134 of 329


 
 
 
response to a common global slowdown and disinflationary headwinds, and more than 
$10 trillion of global sovereign debt trades at negative yields. 
The United States is the only advanced economy with a positive real policy rate.  U.S. 
rates can and do diverge to some extent from global rates, but I think there’s a limit to how far 
this can proceed without consequences that will complicate our efforts to achieve our dual-
mandate objectives.  On inflation, although core PCE inflation is projected to rebound to 
1.8 percent by the end of the year, the staff does not see it over the forecast horizon returning to 
our 2 percent target on a sustained basis.  And I agree, 1.9 percent is close to 2 percent, but let’s 
look at the risks to this outlook.  Financial market signals of expected inflation have rebounded 
since the June meeting, but this is due, I believe, to a repricing, to some extent, of our policy rate 
path.  For example, on June 17, the day before the previous FOMC meeting, five-year, five-year-
forward breakeven inflation fell to 1.77 percent, which was the lowest “print” for this series 
since 2016, nearly three years and seven rate hikes ago.  Since our June meeting, this indicator of 
inflation compensation has rebounded and is just around 2 percent now. 
Regarding the staff outlook for inflation, recall that 1.8 percent is the staff’s current 
estimate of underlying inflation.  The staff can project inflation moving above underlying 
inflation only because it continues to project an output gap of nearly 2 percent of GDP based on 
a u* estimate of 4.6 percent.  One of the reasons that I see a real downside risk to our price-
stability objective, and so of reaching, let alone sustaining, inflation at our target, is that I believe 
the output gap is much smaller than does the staff.  As a result, I see less incipient upward 
cyclical pressure on inflation than built into the staff’s forecast.  My personal estimate of u* is 4 
percent, and in the next SEP round I may mark that down even lower, because I just don’t see the 
wage inflation that would indicate overheating.  So with a u* at 4 percent or below and an 
July 30-31, 2019
135 of 329


 
 
 
Okun’s law coefficient of 2, the output gap would be less than half that of the staff’s, and that 
would mean less upward pressure on inflation in their model. 
Third, let me talk a little bit about financial markets.  We cannot, I firmly believe, be 
handcuffed to financial markets.  They move up and down.  They get things wrong as much as, 
or more than, they get them right.  But I don’t think that we can ignore financial markets.  The 
inversion of the slope of the Treasury yield curve, with respect to 3-month rate/10-year rates, has 
now persisted for around two months.  And, to me, this is a market signal that is hard to ignore.  
As I’ve discussed in previous meetings, there are many factors—domestic and global—
that can operate to flatten the U.S. Treasury curve.  And, for this reason, the slope of the curve by 
itself is not a particularly informative signal about U.S. economic activity.  But outright 
persistent inversions of the 3-month/10-year yield curve are rare, as the San Francisco Fed 
research and other research have pointed out.  And they have, without fail, at least in the past 50 
years, not provided a false signal.  If they’re persistent, and lasted for longer than we’ve had so 
far, they have been followed by a recession within 18 months.  Now, this time may be different.  
Let me stipulate that.  But the risk that it may not should, I think, at least factor into our thinking.  
This is especially the case today, because the yield curve inversion is coinciding with the steep 
fall in global inflation-indexed bond yields and, I might add, in the Laubach-Williams estimates 
of r*. 
At the time of our December FOMC meeting, five-year TIPS yields, five-years forward 
were around 1 percent and as recently as April were 75 basis points.  Right now, they’re about 
30 basis points, which is the lowest level since 2016.  Indeed, globally forward real yields been 
falling.  Falling forward real yields in conjunction with falling inflation measures together 
suggest that market expectations for growth and inflation are marked down—again, not 
July 30-31, 2019
136 of 329


 
 
 
infallible, but something to factor in.  Of course, there’s noise as well as signal in financial 
market prices, but the direction, if not the magnitude, of these moves is consistent with concerns 
the downside risks are elevated and should be factored into our analysis.  Thank you, Chair 
Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Eighth District contacts talked a lot about 
heavy flooding and wet conditions extending for such a long time through the spring and into the 
summer that many crops were substantially delayed or were simply never planted.  There is crop 
insurance, but many policies that are commonly used pay only 60 percent of expected revenue.  
Agribusiness supply is down about one-third this year in many portions of the District.  For 
comparison, we looked back at the great Mississippi River flood of 1993.  We think this year’s 
flooding is about one-third as damaging as that major event.  Our calculation suggests that 
2019:Q3 real GDP will be lower by about 0.15 percentage point because of this factor, mostly in 
reduced Q3 farm inventory because of missing or delayed production. 
Business contacts are concerned about tariffs.  One quote:  “Tariff policy is impacting the 
region, and it’s not just farming.  We need stability in what we are doing with tariffs.”  A global 
trade policy uncertainty index that we track is at its highest level in almost 20 years.  My own 
assessment is that trade policy uncertainty is unlikely to return to lower levels over the forecast 
horizon.  The world is in the midst of a reassessment of global trading arrangements.  It is well 
known from the postwar trade liberalization experience that these are thorny issues that cannot 
be resolved easily or quickly in a comprehensive manner.  This trade policy uncertainty is 
weighing on global growth prospects, and there is some prospect that the feedback to the United 
States will be more consequential than currently contemplated in the U.S. economic outlook. 
July 30-31, 2019
137 of 329


 
 
 
We saw some of this in the international briefing just a few moments ago:  Global 
manufacturing purchasing manager indexes (PMIs) suggest manufacturing currently is in 
contraction.  While the U.S. economy overall is performing reasonably well, at least looking 
backward, real GDP growth is slowing from the 3 percent year-over-year growth rate that we 
were experiencing as of the third quarter of last year and may slow further in the second half of 
2019.  The risk is that the continued slowdown of real GDP growth toward potential growth in 
the United States could be sharper than expected, given the ongoing trade war.  We can afford to 
buy some insurance against such an outcome because inflation by our preferred core PCE 
measure is about 1.6 percent year-over-year, not too different from its average value over the 
past seven years.  The positive surprise in the U.S. economy over the past two and a half years 
has not translated into higher inflation, using our preferred measure. 
While I’m sympathetic to other measures of inflation, I think we should maintain 
credibility based on the preferred measure that we express even though I do respect other 
measures and think highly of them.  I think it’s fair to say that inflation is muted.  Even more 
worrisome to me is that inflation expectations by various measures remain low compared with 
periods over which actual inflation was closer to target.  The St. Louis Fed’s factor-augmented 
vector autoregression, or FAVAR, model suggests actual headline inflation will remain 
meaningfully below 2 percent over the next 12 months.  The very weak relationship between 
labor market activity and inflation in recent years suggests that an impulse to inflation from that 
channel, should it occur, would be manageable.  For these reasons, I think now is a good time to 
re-center both inflation and inflation expectations at our 2 percent target. 
Finally, the slope of the yield curve between the 3-month Treasury rate and the 10-year 
Treasury yield remains inverted.  Recession probability measures based on spreads remain 
July 30-31, 2019
138 of 329


 
 
 
elevated, and in this regard, I agree with Governor Clarida.  The spread between the 2-year 
Treasury yield and the 10-year Treeasury yield is not inverted yet because markets expect us to 
ease at this and upcoming meetings.  For this reason, I do not yet take a negative signal from the 
3-month-to-10 year spread inversion, but it has been 60 days, and I think we need to follow 
through and lower the policy rate here.  My hope is that the yield curve will return to a more 
natural upward slope in the months ahead.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Overall, the reports from District contacts 
suggest that economic activity in the Fourth District slowed in recent weeks, but business 
sentiment has improved, and the majority of our contacts expect growth to remain near trend for 
the remainder of 2019.  The Cleveland Fed staff’s diffusion index of business conditions fell 
from 17 in June to zero in July.  This decline was largely driven by the manufacturing and freight 
sectors, and contacts said recent slowing was at least in part due to activity being pulled forward 
into 2018 to avoid expected increases in tariffs on imports from China.  Slower growth abroad 
was also cited.  Although there’s continued uncertainty about trade policy, it seemed to be less of 
a concern among our contacts than it did at the time of our June meeting, and few contacts 
reported making material changes to their capital spending plans in response. 
District labor market conditions remain strong.  The unemployment rate has moved down 
0.5 percentage point since the start of the year and stood at 4 percent in June.  This is a new low 
for the unemployment rate this expansion and well below the Cleveland staff’s estimate of the 
unemployment rate’s longer-run normal level.  Year-over-year growth in payroll employment in 
the District was about 0.5 percent in June.  While somewhat lower than earlier in the year, payroll 
growth remains above the Cleveland staff’s estimate of its longer-run trend. 
July 30-31, 2019
139 of 329


 
 
 
Except in the freight and manufacturing sectors, District firms continue to report they’re 
having trouble finding workers to meet current demand.  For example, a commercial 
construction contact in Kentucky noted that competition is so intense that if a firm hires 4 skilled 
workers, 3 of them will be gone within 60 days, having gotten better offers from other firms.  In 
another case, a community banker from northwestern Ohio reported that a local manufacturer 
would be happy to hire 10 additional workers if only he could find them.  Tight labor market 
conditions in the District have continued to put upward pressure on wages, especially those of 
lower-wage workers.  However, price pressures at District firms appear to have moderated, 
partly reflecting lower steel prices and shipping costs.  The prices received index, which was 
very elevated in the second half of last year, has fallen over the past two months to levels seen in 
mid-2017. 
Regarding the national economy, incoming data over the intermeeting period were 
largely positive.  These indicators include the June data on payrolls, retail sales, orders of 
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft, and CPI inflation.  In addition, although there 
remains uncertainty surrounding trade policy and tariffs, these concerns have tempered.  A 
slowing in real GDP growth in the second quarter was anticipated, on account of the contribution 
that inventories and net exports made to first-quarter growth.  But second-quarter growth turned 
out to be better than expected at the time of our June meeting, another piece of positive news.  
And growth in real disposable personal income was revised up significantly in the first quarter, 
indicating faster growth in compensation, which should support consumer spending. 
While business investment and manufacturing activity remains subdued, we have seen 
some firming over the past couple of months, and housing market indicators may be stabilizing, 
albeit at a low level of activity.  Financial conditions remain accommodative.  The Chicago 
July 30-31, 2019
140 of 329


 
 
 
Fed’s index indicates that financial conditions are more accommodative than at the beginning of 
this year and for most of 2015 to 2017.  Stock market volatility has declined, and the S&P 500 
index has set multiple record highs over the intermeeting period, suggesting that equity investors 
are not that concerned about the outlook.  The low levels of longer-term Treasury yields and 
other sovereign debt yields suggest these investors have more concerns, but the relatively low 
levels of corporate debt spreads also suggest these concerns are not severe. 
Labor market conditions remain strong.  The rebound in payroll growth in June after a 
weaker reading in May puts average monthly job growth at about 170,000 over the past three 
months and for the year-to-date.  This is a step-down from last year’s strong pace of over 
220,000 per month, but it’s well above trend.  The unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, near a 
50-year low.  It has been running at or below 4 percent for the past 16 months.  The labor force 
participation rate has been near 63 percent over the past three years despite a downward trend 
driven by demographics.  Growth in average hourly earnings has remained stable and is at a 
higher level than a few years ago.  Cleveland staff analysis, which updates analysis from the 
Atlanta Fed using their wage tracker data, indicates that in recent months, wage growth has 
picked up more for job stayers than for job changers.  This, together with stability over the past 
year in the JOLTS quits rate, is consistent with reports given by business contacts that the 
tightness in labor markets has made them focus more on retaining the workers they have. 
Inflation is running below our 2 percent target, but recent readings have begun to firm.  
PCE inflation rebounded to 2.3 percent in the second quarter, and core PCE inflation moved up 
to 1.8 percent.  Over the past year, trimmed mean and median measures based on either PCE or 
CPI inflation have been generally stable and have averaged 2 percent or higher.  For example, in 
June, median CPI inflation was 2.8 percent, and trimmed mean CPI inflation was 2.1 percent.  
July 30-31, 2019
141 of 329


 
 
 
The Cleveland Fed’s experimental median PCE inflation measure was 2.7 percent in June.  
Long-run inflation expectations have remained broadly stable, but several measures have ticked 
up since our previous meeting.  Market-based inflation compensation readings edged up, while 
the Cleveland Fed’s five-year, five-year-forward measure of inflation compensation was little 
changed between May and June. 
At the time of our June meeting, there had been concerns about a softening in the latest 
monthly readings of longer-run household inflation expectations from the University of 
Michigan and New York Fed surveys.  The latest readings in each survey moved up.  Now, to 
better understand inflation dynamics over recent years, the Cleveland staff adopted Stock and 
Watson’s methodology to construct cyclical and acyclical components of core PCE inflation 
based on a finer disaggregation of the data than in other research.  Instead of 14 components, 
they looked at 154 components.  The cyclical component of core inflation, which by definition is 
correlated with measures of labor market slack, accounts for about 40 percent of core PCE.   
Results based on the finer disaggregation reveal that cyclical core PCE inflation has 
continued to rise as labor markets have tightened.  This resolves a puzzle in earlier results, which 
were based on less-aggregated data, that suggested that the cyclical component began to flatten 
out in 2017 despite ongoing improvement in the labor markets.  Cyclical core PCE inflation is 
now essentially back to its pre-recession level, and over the past three months it’s been running 
at slightly above 3 percent, its highest level in the post-crisis period.  The Cleveland Fed staff’s 
vector autoregression (VAR) analysis indicates that cyclical inflation will continue to firm, 
which should help overall PCE inflation return gradually to our 2 percent objective. 
On balance, I view the incoming information on the economy as consistent with my 
modal forecast of output growth slowing toward trend, which I estimate at 2 percent; a strong 
July 30-31, 2019
142 of 329


 
 
 
labor market with the unemployment rate remaining below 4 percent; and inflation gradually 
rising to 2 percent.  While there remain downside risks to the forecast, including slowing global 
growth, the trade situation, geopolitical concerns in the Middle East, and a potentially disorderly 
Brexit, in my view, there’s less risk that a significant weakening of the economy could be 
emerging, and it’s more likely that the U.S. economy will continue to show some resiliency to 
possible negative shocks.  In this context, as I did at our June meeting, I continue to prefer to 
gather more information on how the economy is evolving and continue to assess our outlook and 
its associated risks before making any adjustments in our policy rate.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Since our last meeting, data on the real economy 
have been largely positive.  Consumers are spending, firms are hiring, and workers are being 
drawn into the labor force.  And, as President Rosengren noted and President Mester echoed, 
some of the uncertainties that we were worried about have been tempering a little bit.  These 
developments affirm the underlying momentum in domestic growth and increase my confidence 
that the expansion will be sustained and that we are resilient to the things that we were worried 
about.  This characterization is echoed by my contacts, who are still executing on what they call 
their plan A’s but are making sure that their plan B’s are still ready—right in front, in fact. 
I know there’s a lot of disagreement around the table about this, but I view the news on 
inflation as less bright.  Friday’s GDP release showed that, over the past four quarters, core PCE 
prices have risen only 1.5 percent.  Of course, as the Board staff notes, some of this weakness 
may be transitory.  And recent signs of modest firming in the monthly inflation series are 
encouraging.  But we have seen several false victories during the expansion, with inflation 
July 30-31, 2019
143 of 329


 
 
 
briefly hitting our 2 percent target only to slip back down again.  So these positive monthly 
readings do not make me especially confident that we are on track to achieve our inflation goal. 
Most importantly, our models of future inflation are not perfect, and I increasingly put 
weight on the notion that more persistent, rather than transitory, factors are at play.  These 
factors may be hard to pin down in our current models.  But the consistent one-sided misses of 
our inflation forecasts suggest that we should consider their presence and their potential effects 
even if we don’t know yet how to precisely quantify them.  And as Governor Clarida mentioned, 
one possible persistent factor is that we are just wrong on the gaps, that u* is just lower than we 
think for reasons that are secular or not yet showing through.  This would make the output gap 
smaller and explain one of the reasons for the consistent one-sided misses of our inflation 
forecasts. 
Whatever the reasons, repeated misses on realized inflation create downside risks to 
expected inflation.  Indeed, in the past few months, inflation option markets have posted notable 
declines in the likelihood of inflation reaching 2 percent or higher in the next five years.  With all 
of that said, it is still tempting—and you hear this a lot in the public—to discount small misses in 
inflation even if they persist for many years and especially when they are related to potentially 
idiosyncratic factors. 
A few of my contacts put it this way:  “What’s a couple of tenths?  A tenth here, a tenth 
there.”  That’s what they like to say.  But lessons drawn from the experience of other countries, 
most notably Japan, provide a cautionary tale, and new work by researchers in San Francisco 
illustrate the risks.  Specifically, they analyzed the response of Japanese inflation expectations 
since 2013 to monetary reforms implemented under Abenomics.  The reform started with an 
adoption of an explicit 2 percent target for inflation in 2013, followed by sequential QE 
July 30-31, 2019
144 of 329


 
 
 
programs, negative interest rates, yield curve control, and an eventual commitment to overshoot 
the 2 percent inflation target.  The staff analysis in San Francisco shows that, overall, the reforms 
did little to boost inflation expectations even upon announcement.  In fact, after the introduction 
of negative interest rates, inflation expectations actually fell slightly most likely, or at least 
somewhat likely, because the move was seen as a negative signal about the BOJ’s inflation 
outlook. 
The key “takeaway” from this analysis is that, once the inflation anchor drifts down, it is 
very hard for monetary policy actions to raise it back up even if you go all in.  And I don’t think 
we’re Japan, and I actually don’t currently share the Board staff’s view that the U.S. anchor has 
already dropped.  But I am worried it could drift and that we look more like Japan in the 1990s 
when they started to see a drift—not like Japan today, when it has drifted quite a bit and it’s hard 
to get it back up.  And so with real GDP growth projected to slow to trend in the United States 
and global headwinds blowing against us, this poses additional downside risks to realized 
inflation, which then, of course, feeds back into inflation expectations. 
Now, thinking about global conditions, let me briefly turn to China, which looms large, 
especially if you’re sitting on the West Coast.  There has been a lot of discussion about the 
question, is China’s growth slowing in coming years?  And China’s reported growth shows a 
gradual slowdown, but it has been remarkably smooth since 2013.  In fact, this was noted in a 
March Board briefing, which characterizes the greatest moderation ever recorded among two 
countries.  So that’s quite an accomplishment.  So the question is, can we take the reported 
statistics at face value?  In building on previous work, researchers at the San Francisco Fed tried 
to provide an assessment of this.  They developed an alternative growth index using China’s 
July 30-31, 2019
145 of 329


 
 
 
trading partner export data, which is collected outside of China and not dependent at all on 
China’s statistical agencies. 
Their alternative index confirms that the official Chinese figures have been implausibly 
smooth, remarkably smooth.  So they are not sure the Great Moderation is as great as it seems.  
They find that there is much more volatility in the GDP figure since 2013, and they also find—
and this is the important part, I think—a much more pronounced slowdown over the past two 
years than the Chinese data suggest.  This supports the idea that China might be slowing more 
than we think based on simply the published GDP data.  It also aligns with the views of my 
contacts who have many investments in China and travel there quite frequently, and they are 
telling me increasingly that there is a risk of a greater slowdown in China—not a falling off the 
charts, but a greater slowdown than you might project simply looking at the GDP data. 
The arguments that underlie that are that less-expensive production opportunities in 
newly emerging markets, along with higher tariffs on Chinese-produced goods, have simply 
prompted companies with Chinese operations and sourcing activities to shift outside of China 
and into other countries—Vietnam and Cambodia being two of the beneficiaries.  And China still 
has a hand in many of these industries.  In fact, they are funding the development in many of 
those industries.  But the move slowed job and income growth for Chinese workers, and this 
slows the chance that the Chinese domestic economy will continue to grow, and that its 
consumption-based move will be as fast as it had hoped.  So, on balance, these factors make my 
contacts and me a little more bearish on China than bullish on China even if the trade disputes 
are resolved in the way that we hope they will be. 
Overall, I see the domestic momentum in the economy as resilient.  It showed itself to be 
resilient.  But we are still leaning against slower global real growth and a lot of uncertainty that 
July 30-31, 2019
146 of 329


 
 
 
just changes the name, but it continues to be uncertainty.  Now it’s Brexit.  And if you think 
about those things, I project that those headwinds will slow our economy to trend growth even if 
we’re moving against it.  And with inflation not at 2 percent yet, it doesn’t give a lot of impetus 
for it getting to 2 percent without further policy accommodation.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In my remarks this afternoon I’m going to try 
to make a case for the claim that we are currently well on track to achieving our dual mandate.  
The abatement of some of the uncertainties and risks buffeting the economy; the positive profile 
of recent economic data for job gains, consumer spending, and, in my view, inflation; and, 
perhaps most importantly, evidence on how firms appear to be navigating these uncertainties 
give me added confidence in my outlook for the economy.  In fact, if it were a submission round, 
I would be penciling in modest markups to my forecasts of real GDP growth and inflation. 
Now, given the uncertainties that still exist and not being one to tempt fate, I am not 
going to suggest that we hang a “Mission Accomplished” banner behind the lectern before the 
Chairman’s next press conference.  But I do think our primary message should be that the 
economy is, and looks like it will remain, in a good place. 
Reports from Sixth District contacts continue to indicate that business sentiment is 
favorable.  Most contacts noted they are on track to meet or exceed their revenue targets for 2019 
and that recent developments have not knocked them off course.  On balance, firms are slightly 
more upbeat now relative to the previous two cycles, and I am attributing that modest 
improvement in sentiment in part to the de-escalation of trade tensions with Mexico and China 
that happened last month. 
July 30-31, 2019
147 of 329


 
 
 
I’d like to make a few specific points regarding trade policy uncertainty and its effect on 
firm decisionmaking.  In a recently updated paper titled “The Economic Effects of Trade Policy 
Uncertainty,” researchers from the International Finance Division at the Board find that the 
recent rise in trade policy uncertainty has been a modest drag on the aggregate level of 
investment over the past year or so.  This conclusion dovetails both qualitatively and 
quantitatively with the estimates my staff and their collaborators derived from businesses’ 
responses earlier this year to our Survey of Business Uncertainty, or SBU, as we call it.  Along 
with the fact that, historically, our survey responses have been good predictors of actual firm 
behavior, I take the consistency of our survey results with the International Finance team’s 
analysis as some validation for the information we obtained from this instrument.  That’s 
important because of what our recent results suggest about anticipated conditions in the future. 
In contrast to a large spike in trade policy uncertainty in June, which would suggest a 
larger effect on aggregate investment, firms in our SBU panel and throughout my District do not 
appear to be reacting more intensely to trade tensions and uncertainty.  In the July round of the 
SBU, we asked a broad set of special questions probing firms on how the trade landscape has 
affected their capital expenditures, their sales revenue, and their employment outcomes over the 
first half of the year.  We further asked about expectations regarding those variables.  Our 
preliminary results continue to suggest modest effects on capital expenditures in line with the 
responses to a similar question we fielded last year.  Further, our respondents indicated only 
minor effects on sales revenue and employment.  Overall, the SBU’s Business Expectations 
Index, which aggregates the results over the responses to capital expenditure, sales, and 
employment questions, held up in a relatively favorable territory.  And, consistent with the 
July 30-31, 2019
148 of 329


 
 
 
staff’s trade policy uncertainty measure, this survey’s measure of business uncertainty actually 
fell moderately in July. 
Perhaps as noteworthy is that the subindex on capital expenditure expectations remains at 
a healthy level.  These survey results were largely echoed by my contacts and directors.  To be 
sure, there are specific companies and sectors where the effect is significant.  One director leads 
a firm that is definitely a casualty of retaliatory tariffs and slowing growth in Asia, but his 
experience is not representative.  In fact, the conversation about the travails of his business at our 
board meeting was instructive.  He gave a clear indication that hits taken by his company will 
eventually have downstream effects on his suppliers, even though those businesses are not 
themselves directly exposed to international trade. 
As it happened, some of our other directors, representing health-care and government 
contractor sectors, are customers of some of those very same suppliers, and they indicated that 
they will be very happily picking up some of that slack.  Though perhaps not a representative 
conversation, I think that back-and-forth captured the essence of the anecdotal reports over this 
intermeeting period.  Pockets of weakness clearly exist, and they will be felt.  But, on average, 
businesses are moving forward and expect, if not last year’s growth in sales, employment, and 
capital spending, a solid and satisfactory performance on all counts over the next year or so. 
I want to be clear that these expectations should not come off as Pollyanna-ish.  It is lost 
on no one that trade tensions have yet to actually come to full resolution, and there is full 
recognition that tensions could easily intensify.  Yet here I have gathered that the protracted 
period of uncertainty has prompted firms to engage in contingency planning and, in some cases, 
reconfigure their supply chains as a defense position.  Should tariffs and trade restrictions 
July 30-31, 2019
149 of 329


 
 
 
intensify, these firms may be less exposed to the fallout than they might have been, say, a 
year ago. 
Having staked out a relatively sanguine position on one-half of our mandate, let me keep 
my streak going by pivoting to my read on inflation and inflation expectations.  To cut to the 
chase, I see inflation as trending toward target, and I still see inflation expectations as being 
reasonably well anchored.  I am not convinced that the ex-food-and-energy core PCE inflation 
statistic has been giving us a very good read on the inflation trend.  Because the treatment of 
outliers in this measure is ad hoc, it can still be relatively noisy.  And this was the case earlier 
this year when a sharp decline in financial services prices pushed core PCE inflation lower. 
Trimmed mean inflation measures, like those produced by the Cleveland and Dallas 
Fedderal Reserve Banks, are much more robust to these sharp relative price changes and, as a 
result, are more likely to reflect the true underlying inflation trend.  In fact, in formal statistical 
tests, these measures are more accurate than measures that exclude food and energy in 
forecasting inflation a year or so out.  It is important, in my view, then, that the Dallas trimmed-
mean measure is signaling goal-consistent inflation in the period ahead.  And that’s been the case 
officially, at least through May.  And this morning’s underlying data suggest that it still looks 
like the trimmed mean is trending at target. 
In addition, core PCE inflation continues its rebound—another strong suggestion that the 
weakness we saw earlier this year was indeed transitory and another data point in favor of a 
trimmed mean approach.  Inflation expectations are at least as important as the current 
underlying inflation trend in shaping our ability to meet our price stability objective over the 
longer run.  And, like underlying inflation measures, not all measures of inflation expectations 
are created equal. 
July 30-31, 2019
150 of 329


 
 
 
My staff compared the inflation-forecasting performance of three different survey 
measures—surveys of near-term expectations of professionals, of households, and of 
businesses—with the market-based measures of inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS.  Of the four, the headline and core inflation 
predictions of professional forecasters tend to be considerably more accurate than those 
generated by household survey expectations or breakeven market-based measures. 
Further, my team found that, over an admittedly small sample, business inflation 
expectations have been about as accurate as professional forecasters in forecasting future 
inflation in recent years.  The inflation expectations of forecasters are little changed and appear 
to be reasonably well anchored.  The same is true of firm expectations derived from the Atlanta 
Fed’s Survey of Business Inflation Expectations. 
In sum, I expect the performance of the economy to continue to be solid and for inflation 
to progress toward our target.  This view substantially colors my opinion about the appropriate 
policy course or, even more importantly, our communications about the decisions we make at 
this meeting.  But more on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  At our previous meeting, we flagged downside 
risks in the environment.  Since then, the information we’ve received suggests that outlook has 
gotten a bit brighter.  Strong employment growth in June lowered the risk that the labor market 
was lagging.  Consumer confidence remains high.  Robust data on consumer spending in May 
and June supported optimistic forecasts of PCE this year. 
While trade negotiations are far from settled, the threatened escalation has not happened.  
The debt ceiling and budget deals have been negotiated.  The stock market hit a record high.  
July 30-31, 2019
151 of 329


 
 
 
Nonetheless, investment was sluggish in the second quarter.  Our Fifth District Survey of 
Manufacturing Activity dropped meaningfully into negative territory.  But as I speak to them, I 
hear that businesses have been more resilient than I had anticipated six weeks ago. 
As President Daly suggests, my contacts tell me their investment plans have continued, 
though, to be fair, with a somewhat more cautious posture.  The only exceptions are a couple 
with significant foreign exposure, reflecting the international weakness we see.  This data profile 
is not inconsistent with a return to trend growth. 
We’ve all been debating what to make of the relatively modest wage growth 
accompanying our low unemployment rates.  I would point to divergence between entry and 
managerial levels.  Entry hiring is very tight, especially for production employees like tellers or 
retail clerks or food service.  Even though you’d expect lower skills late cycle, we hear multiple 
reports of increases in entry-level wages, most recently Bank of America’s move to $20 per 
hour.  The Current Population Survey earnings data support this, with growth at the bottom of 
the earnings distribution faster than at the median for all demographic splits. 
Now, I’d agree, managerial and professional hiring is different.  Employers also find that 
job market tight but can bear the pain of an elongated search.  They tell me they’re choosing to 
delay hiring rather than escalate wages, as suggested by the gap in openings versus hires in the 
JOLTS data.  In the tightest sectors like construction, I’m hearing firms turn down or defer work 
rather than escalating wages and increasing hiring.  And the point I’m trying to make is that full 
employment can and is affecting growth, not just wages. 
We, of course, are spending a lot of time discussing inflation.  I might offer three 
perspectives.  First, like everyone else, I’d love to have a symmetric distribution around our 
2 percent target.  I have a hard time seeing current levels as an urgent problem.  The past three 
July 30-31, 2019
152 of 329


 
 
 
monthly readings of core PCE are over, not below, our target, at 2.5 percent.  The Dallas 
trimmed mean remains steady at 2 percent.  The Tealbook’s inflation forecast, I believe, still has 
core inflation over 2 percent for the second half of the year, even with a flat federal funds rate 
assumption.  The first-quarter slow readings had to be affected by the confidence shock we had 
at the end of last year and its effect on firms’ willingness to push and accept price increases.  The 
data certainly aren’t perfect, but this close to our inflation target feels really close to me.  I liked 
the Chicago conference comments by Sharon Kozicki of the Bank of Canada, which suggested to 
me that if we are in the range of our inflation target and headed in the right direction, we 
shouldn’t worry too much. 
Second, some indicators of inflation expectations have risen since our previous meeting, 
perhaps, to be fair, related to changing expectations on our rate path.  More fundamentally, as I 
talk to contacts, I get no sense that they see us off target, nor that their expectations are moving 
down.  I do worry that the more we talk about low inflation, the higher the risk is that we will 
change that perception. 
Finally, to the extent that you see these inflation levels as a problem, I do believe it’s a 
structural issue in the context of anchored expectations.  Firms have embedded perceptions about 
the reaction functions of their competitors and their customers.  Over the past couple of decades, 
they have gotten used to limited pricing power in the environment we’ve supported.  Low-priced 
big box stores have taken share and driven supplier prices down.  Purchasing departments have 
become more talented and aggressive, leveraging global, lower-cost competitors and private 
label. 
Internet transparency has made it easy for customers to shop around.  The growth in 
government has introduced an ever-larger, low-priced purchaser.  The reduction in firm exit 
July 30-31, 2019
153 of 329


 
 
 
rates, perhaps supported by loose lending terms and low interest rates, could be limiting industry 
rationalization and its resulting effect on pricing power.  These pricing paradigms won’t change 
quickly on an aggregate basis.  Contacts hear us talk about overall numbers, but their pricing 
behavior and resulting inflation is being driven more by the supply-and-demand dynamics in 
their particular sectors. 
Are competitors entering or exiting?  Are supply costs increasing or decreasing?  Are 
customers and supply markets globalizing or localizing?  Can value propositions be defined that 
capture greater customer surplus?  Our moves aren’t changing these parameters, or at least not 
quickly.  These structural headwinds are consistent with the long lag we’ve seen in transmission 
of policy through to inflation.  
Tomorrow I’ll come back to the challenge of using moderate moves in short-term interest 
rates to intervene in these structural dynamics.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Regarding the forecast, I am in general 
agreement with the staff’s near-term forecast of economic activity.  But I am a bit more 
confident that inflation will gradually return to target.  I still have concerns, like others do, as 
inflation has remained stubbornly below target.  Also of concern is that market-based inflation 
expectations continue to lie below target.  However, as others have noted, some of the recent 
readings on inflation have shown an uptick, and inflation appears to be moving in the right 
direction.  Even if the pace is excruciatingly slow, it is moving. 
The upgrade in the staff’s economic projection appears consistent with the most recent 
data, and I share the staff’s view.  The upgrade is also consistent with what I’m hearing from 
contacts in the Third District.  Although the Third District did not experience a strong 
July 30-31, 2019
154 of 329


 
 
 
bounceback in employment, unemployment remains historically low, and the unemployment rate 
has fallen to that of the nation.  As well, we are seeing increases in the participation rate. 
For manufacturing, our business survey recovered markedly in July, with orders, 
shipments, and employment returning to healthy territory.  The stronger readings are driven by 
fewer firms indicating they were seeing a decline in activity rather than more firms saying they 
saw an increase in activity.  Price indexes, however, were quite soft. 
Regarding the future, respondents are somewhat optimistic.  And, as others have noted, 
they continue to plan for additional capital expenditures and employment growth.  One 
diversified manufacturer, one of our contacts who serves global markets, indicated that the third 
quarter looks like it’s going to remain soft, but he is starting to see a strong pickup in fourth-
quarter orders across the globe. 
We’re also hearing reports of midcycle wage increases in order to retain workers.  And 
it’s interesting that people are seeing a lot of wage pressure now in the range of $18 to $25 an 
hour.  However, economic uncertainty, especially concerning trade, continues to weigh 
negatively on our business community. 
Now, regarding services, we saw a rebound in our nonmanufacturing sector as well.  
However, some of that optimism appears to have waned in the service sector.  On the downside, 
residential real estate markets are moribund, with no sign of pickup in activity.  For example, 
real estate transaction counts have turned down, and they appear to be a leading indicator of 
housing activity. 
A contact indicated that revenue in her building supply business that serves that market is 
also down.  But just as an aside, she did report she had a very interesting week.  In one week, she 
had her first offer to be paid in Bitcoin, and in that same week an Amish customer came in and 
July 30-31, 2019
155 of 329


 
 
 
paid with a barrel of cash.  And I literally mean a barrel of cash.  [Laughter]  So there is a change 
in technology going on in our society.   
As an aside, recent work in Philadelphia and elsewhere has highlighted the continued 
decline in dynamism in our economy in terms of new business formation and labor mobility, 
both of which are contributing factors to declining productivity.  And I raise this because at our 
recent policy briefing, we had a very interesting presentation on declining geographic labor 
mobility.  Mobility has been declining steadily for 30 years and is largely the result of decreased 
out-mobility from the west and the south.  This is largely due to the convergence of population 
growth rates and the increased proportion of the population that is now native to those regions.  
The increase in the percentage of people who are not only born in those regions but whose 
parents were born in the region is associated with an increased desire for people to stay put.  In 
some sense, it increases the utility of remaining where one is and, therefore, is part of an optimal 
household decision. 
The study found no evidence that there has been a negative effect on struggling local 
labor markets or on short-run population movements.  It is not that the population fails to 
relocate when needed, but that there is simply less need to relocate.  Thus, the decline in mobility 
is largely due to these optimal staying positions.  And the reason I raise this is, these results and 
others add to my growing sense that it is these types of structural factors that are increasingly 
important and, of course, not within our reach given our mandate. 
And I think what we’re seeing, whether it’s these factors or the research on inflation by 
Stock and Watson and others that President Mester and others have talked about, is that these 
things seem to not have the same reaction to our moves.  And this is something that I think is 
worthy of further study as we move forward. 
July 30-31, 2019
156 of 329


 
 
 
So, to summarize, the District’s economy is growing modestly, but that growth is almost 
entirely driven by the consumer, which is exactly what we are seeing nationally.  The most 
recent data have reduced much of the pessimism that I expressed at our June meeting, and it 
looks like the recovery still has room to run.  So more on how that affects my policy stance 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My contacts were mixed this round.  On balance, 
they indicate that growth is proceeding at trend or slightly faster, with no inflation pressures.  
Starting with the commentary about growth, in discussing our discount rate recommendation, a 
couple of my banking directors reported that their clients in manufacturing and construction were 
doing quite well.  They said concern over the global economy was holding back capital 
expenditure some but wasn’t taking the sheen off of the generally bullish business environment. 
Both of the major automakers we spoke to this round were satisfied with the recent pace 
of vehicle sales.  They remain positive about the near-term outlook, with sales in the second half 
of the year expected to run a little bit above the first-half rate.  And a large temporary help 
agency noted that domestic demand was holding up well, and they weren’t making any changes 
to their outlook for the United States. 
Regarding the less positive news, this same temporary help firm reported some pretty bad 
numbers for their business in Europe, particularly Germany.  The weakness did not appear to be 
intensifying, but they won’t be able to tell for sure until they see the size of the seasonal pickup 
in activity following the regular August vacation downtime. 
There also were some downbeat reports about manufacturing activity in the United 
States, in contrast to what I heard from the bankers.  Though I’m not pushing the panic button 
July 30-31, 2019
157 of 329


 
 
 
yet, one of my directors who runs a large manufacturing conglomerate has become more 
nervous, and many of his counterparts have seen softening demand in recent weeks.  And a 
major steelmaker was quite downbeat.  Demand was down in every sector except energy for 
them.  More generally, there is a sense of fragility among my manufacturing contacts.  As one 
major equipment producer put it, although their business is currently doing well, the cumulative 
effects from prolonged business uncertainties could push the sector into a downturn following 
one more bad event. 
With regard to wages and prices, my temporary help contact continued to see the same 
modest wage growth in his domestic business that he’s been reporting for some time.  Although 
he noted that tight labor markets aren’t generating a lot of wage pressure in the United States, he 
does a lot of business in Europe.  And, as he put it, the Phillips curve is alive and well, at least in 
the Czech Republic, where the unemployment rate is low and wages are growing at a rate of 
about 8 percent. 
On the price front, the steelmaker reported that prices for basic steel products have ticked 
up a bit in recent weeks but were still down a good deal from last year.  He also made a point of 
noting that prices today were lower than they were just prior to when steel tariffs were invoked 
in March 2018.  Ironic, isn’t it?  And an equipment manufacturer said that while still high, at 
least transportation logistics costs were not rising more.  So, all in all, I heard nothing from my 
contacts to suggest building wage or price pressures. 
Regarding the national outlook, combining my contact reports with the incoming data, we 
came up with a fairly decent outlook for growth this year.  The numbers we put together are 
similar to those in the Tealbook, with real GDP rising a bit under 2.5 percent in 2019 and the 
unemployment rate ending the year around 3.6 percent.  This is a moderately stronger forecast 
July 30-31, 2019
158 of 329


 
 
 
than I had in June.  I also think the near-term downside risks have abated some.  True, global 
uncertainties remain, and they are having a notable imprint on cap-ex, but at least the latest 
orders numbers look a little bit better.  Furthermore, businesses aren’t showing any hesitancy in 
hiring, which reduces the risk of global uncertainties spilling over to the consumer sector.  I 
almost feel like I should be on that side of the table.  [Laughter] 
And the downside risks from the potential 2019 fiscal cliff now appear to be off the table.  
However, over a longer period, there still seems to be an ongoing fragility in business confidence 
that could spark material cutbacks in activity if trade talks or other headline events turn sour.  It 
does seem that important downside risks remain, but it’s hard to envision any notable potentially 
offsetting upside tailwinds. 
What about inflation?  We have had a couple of good monthly readings on consumer 
prices.  That’s encouraging.  The incoming data have pushed our time-series model forecast up 
somewhat, but the model still generally projects inflation to be flat at around 1.75 percent, similar 
to the Tealbook’s low underlying trend.  And there simply isn’t any meaningful evidence of 
building inflation pressures.  As I noted, wage growth is modest, and commodity prices are 
restrained.  And TIPS breakevens and other indicators of inflation expectations have not moved 
in any meaningful manner.  They are still too low. 
Our forecast has inflation moving up to target and then overshooting some by 2021, but 
this relies on aggressive policy actions, including an explicit acknowledgement of policies aimed 
at lifting inflation to its symmetric target.  Indeed, if we don’t do something definitive soon or 
get bailed out by simple luck, I fear inflation will remain mired below target for the foreseeable 
future.  More on this tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
July 30-31, 2019
159 of 329


 
 
 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our Dallas Fed base case for 2019 U.S. 
GDP growth is now approximately 2 to 2.25 percent.  This forecast has been adjusted downward 
over the past three months, primarily because of the effect of heightened trade tensions and 
decelerating rates of global growth.  I would emphasize, though, that much of the deceleration in 
growth from 2018 and 2019 was expected because of the waning of fiscal stimulus.  So even 
though the trade tensions weren’t expected, we did still expect growth to decelerate. 
In the June meeting I said the risks to our forecast were to the downside.  My own sense 
today is that, due to the strength of the U.S. consumer and some time for businesses to adjust 
psychologically to heightened uncertainty, the U.S. growth outlook is stabilizing, although 
there’s still, based on discussions with our contacts, an underlying fragility, which is affecting 
business investment. 
To that point, contacts in the 11th District particularly cite the threatened trade tariffs 
against Mexico as having been the event that really jarred their thinking about the economic 
outlook for their businesses.  While China and other trade uncertainties certainly had an effect, it 
was the estimated financial effect of the tariffs on Mexico, if they’d been enacted, that would 
have had a material effect on a number of businesses that we speak with.  And they haven’t yet 
recovered; the jarring effect of the threat has made them begin to believe that trade uncertainty, 
even with countries we have trade agreements with, is likely to be a persistent feature of 
managing their businesses. 
As a consequence, many describe actions to revisit capital spending, reassess supply 
chains and logistical arrangements, and generally operate in a much more cautious manner.  With 
these conversations and our Dallas Fed surveys, all of this has convinced me that trade 
uncertainty now is just more likely to be a more persistent headwind for economic growth and 
July 30-31, 2019
160 of 329


 
 
 
uncertainty is going to be with us.  I was hopeful that trade uncertainty would be more positively 
resolved.  But I also believe that businesses have a real capacity to psychologically adjust to this.  
And because of that, most of our contacts report a solid business outlook, albeit at a more 
moderate pace than in 2018 and certainly a more moderate pace than they might have expected 
just three or four months ago. 
Our Dallas Fed contacts continue to report difficulty finding workers as a top challenge.  
This is particularly for companies in the more rural parts of our District as well as smaller 
companies that are unable to offer promotion opportunities, certain types of employment 
benefits, as well as a level of job security and stability that can be offered by larger companies.  
Across the board, company contacts report to us needing to pay higher wages at the low end—
and I mean the $12 to $15 range as the low end—as well as for skilled workers, but larger 
companies report no substantial issues in finding or retaining workers to fill jobs in the middle.  
And by the middle, I mean $25 per hour plus benefits. 
Regarding inflation, our Dallas trimmed-mean measure of inflation, which we 
recalculated in response to this morning’s releases, continues to run at approximately 2 percent.  
We continue to expect it to end the year in the neighborhood of 2 percent.  I would continue to 
emphasize differentiating between the cyclical and structural aspects of inflation.  I believe with 
growth at or above potential, cyclical inflationary forces continue to firm.   
I continue to believe, however, that an intensification of the structural forces of 
technology, technology-enabled disruption, and globalization are limiting the pricing power of 
businesses.  And to the extent our contacts are experiencing wage pressure, they report to us it’s 
just as likely these pressures are going to translate into margin erosion rather than price 
increases. 
July 30-31, 2019
161 of 329


 
 
 
I would say that a substantial number of our contacts are recently pointing out to us and 
to me that they have a number of issues with trade uncertainty, global growth deceleration, 
challenges with their workforce, and competitive pressures, but they emphasize—a little more 
vocally recently—that availability and cost of capital are not among their operating concerns. 
And, increasingly, some of our contacts are citing low cost of capital as potentially 
having a negative effect on their industry dynamics.  And what do they mean by that?  Allowing 
zombie companies to continue to survive.  Lowering the discount rate for those competitors who 
are not making a profit and who are disrupting their businesses and, by and large, undermining 
capital discipline.  I am hearing that raised by our business contacts more. 
Having said all of that, basically what you’re hearing from me is, I am, I guess, sanguine 
about real GDP and inflation.  There is one thing out there that I am increasingly concerned 
about, and Governor Clarida talked about, and that is market-determined interest rates vis-à-vis 
the federal funds rate. 
First, as has been mentioned, we all know that a material percentage of government 
bonds globally are now negative yielding.  In addition, apparently in response to recent trade 
tension intensification and decelerating rates of global real growth, U.S. Treasury yields have 
declined, all along the curve.  I am sensitive to the possibility that some of this—just some of 
it—may be a response to central bank rhetoric.  But I believe that a good bit of the decline, along 
with the inversion of the 3-month/10-year yield curve, is due to an expectation of diminished 
prospects for global growth.  And I have begun to believe that this situation is likely to persist 
and is worth paying attention to in thinking of prospects for future economic growth and in 
formulating monetary policy.  This is a nice way of saying that the level of the federal funds rate 
is out of alignment with the rest of the Treasury curve. 
July 30-31, 2019
162 of 329


 
 
 
Now, if I look at this a different way and just step back—with my team, we have gone 
back and looked over the past number of years of economic growth, and we looked at pre-2017.  
For a number of years we were basically in a 2 percent growth economy, maybe a 1.75 to 
2 percent growth economy.  And what happened in 2017 is, we had the prospect of fiscal 
stimulus; we had the actual passing of substantial fiscal stimulus.  Before that prospect of fiscal 
stimulus, I have to remind myself that the target range for the federal funds rate was at 25 to 50 
basis points.  We then had our increases in 2017 and 2018.  We got to a range of 2.25 to 2.5 
percent. 
In my view, we are now—I am not thrilled with the way we have gotten here, because of 
trade tensions, but—we may now well be in a 2 percent, maybe 2.25 percent growth economy.  
The question, then, before the house is, in that regard, and setting aside the fiscal stimulus that 
we have experienced over the past couple of years, are market-determined rates out of alignment 
with this growth potential of the U.S. economy? 
In my own view—and I’ve looked back to what Treasury interest rates were in 2016 and 
2015—I’m not sure today’s rates are out of alignment with that.  I do think the federal funds rate, 
though, is out of alignment with those rates, and I do believe we’re at the point at which it’s 
worth paying attention to, because I believe if this situation is allowed to persist, it will 
ultimately affect financial conditions negatively, which in turn will create headwinds for 
economic growth.  And so that’s the big issue that I think should be addressed, which we’ll talk 
more about tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The outlook for the 10th District economy is 
little changed since our June meeting.  Business contacts remain positive, while noting a slower 
July 30-31, 2019
163 of 329


 
 
 
and more typical pace of growth compared with 2018.  Our surveys of services and 
manufacturing activity reported flat activity in June and July, but the majority of contacts tell us 
that they have not changed their plans for 2019. 
District employment continues to expand at a moderate pace across our seven states.  
Unemployment rates remain at historically low levels, and labor force participation rates have 
stabilized for prime-age individuals.  Given the current stage of the business cycle, job gains 
remain quite healthy, with employment growth exceeding population growth in each of our 
states. 
Like the nation, the region’s residential construction and real estate sectors have slowed.  
Single-family permits are down about 16 percent compared with last year.  And, although 
slightly below year-ago levels, home sales have improved over the past couple of months.  Home 
prices continue to rise in every District state, but the pace of appreciation has slowed. 
Oil price volatility has increased in recent months, as markets weigh concerns about 
demand and geopolitical tensions.  With oil prices just above breakeven levels, and natural gas 
prices well below, the District’s energy sector is not expected to contribute significantly to 
growth.  Likewise, the agriculture sector shows no signs of a turnaround, with adverse weather 
issues and unresolved trade disputes with China. 
Regarding the national economy, my outlook is relatively unchanged from our June 
meeting.  Incoming data suggest that the economy is expanding at a moderate pace but, as 
anticipated for some time, with less momentum than the stronger pace of growth last year.  I 
expect real GDP growth to stabilize close to its trend rate in the medium term, the unemployment 
rate to stay at its current level, and inflation to remain subdued. 
July 30-31, 2019
164 of 329


 
 
 
The expansion relies heavily on solid growth in household spending.  Recent readings on 
household consumption, in particular spending on durables, have rebounded from their weak 
readings in the first quarter.  This bounceback in spending, coupled with continued high levels of 
consumer confidence, suggests that consumers generally feel optimistic about their economic 
prospects. 
Importantly, household spending continues to be supported by a robust labor market.  
The strong reading on June payrolls was a welcome rebound from the weak May report, 
suggesting that over the past three months employers added, on average, 170,000 jobs per month 
to their payrolls.  This deceleration in payroll growth remains consistent with my modal outlook, 
which calls for a gradual deceleration of employment growth to levels more consistent with the 
pace of labor force growth by the end of 2020. 
In contrast to the relatively healthy consumer sector, both residential investment and 
some components of business investment have been a drag on real GDP growth.  Residential 
investment contracted during the first half of this year, and new orders for core capital goods 
have been below shipments for six of the past seven months.  This weaker investment picture is 
consistent with the June National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB) survey, where 
the fraction of small businesses reporting a capital expenditure during the past six months has 
declined since the start of the year.  Still, the net fraction of firms planning to increase 
employment in the next three months remains near its post-recession peaks.  I hear a very similar 
story from my own business contacts. 
Weakness in business investment is consistent with a weaker global outlook.  And 
spillover to the U.S. manufacturing sector has shown up in the new export orders component of 
the ISM manufacturing index.  By contrast, current production and employment indicators in the 
July 30-31, 2019
165 of 329


 
 
 
services sector seem to be healthy and generally consistent with an economy slowing toward 
trend. 
The United States continues to import low inflation, and I expect this disinflationary 
influence to continue throughout the forecast horizon.  Goods prices in the PCE price index 
continue to show deflation, owing to the large appreciation of the dollar and the resulting drop in 
import prices that began early last year.  In contrast, services prices continue to rise at a stable 
rate over 2 percent. 
While I still see risk around my outlook for both real activity and inflation as tilted to the 
downside, I have been encouraged to see some firming in U.S. economic data since our June 
meeting, and fears of an escalation in U.S.–China trade tensions have been somewhat alleviated.  
The successful negotiation of a deal to increase federal spending and lift the debt ceiling is also a 
positive sign.  The contours of weak business investment and a weak global outlook against the 
backdrop of healthy consumer spending and a strong labor market are reminiscent in a number of 
aspects to the 2015–16 period.  During that time, resilient consumer spending sustained the 
economic expansion despite global headwinds and a slowdown in investment. 
Obviously, such an outcome cannot be assured in the context of today’s dynamics, so 
careful monitoring of these downside risks remains important in judging the appropriate stance 
of monetary policy in the months ahead.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My baseline outlook for the domestic economy 
has not changed since the June meeting.  I continue to expect output growth will slow this year 
but remain near or a little above its trend, and that the labor market will continue to show 
strength, with the unemployment rate holding near its current historical low. 
July 30-31, 2019
166 of 329


 
 
 
With regard to prices, incoming data confirm that the dip in inflation early in the year 
was transitory, but the pickup in monthly price increases in the second quarter was smaller than 
the staff had been anticipating.  In particular, the 12-month change in core PCE prices through 
the end of June was just 1.6 percent.  The year-over-year changes are expected to rise to 
1.8 percent this summer and to hold there through the end of the year.  If this occurs, it will be 
close to where I had expected we would be back in June. 
In my assessment, some of the potential downside risks to the outlook have eased in 
recent weeks.  For one, we saw a large increase in the payroll numbers in June, which appears to 
have confirmed that the May figures were not the precursor of a more material slowdown in job 
growth.  Averaging over the first six months of the year, payroll gains have been about 172,000 
per month, which is a healthy amount that is sufficient to accommodate new entrants into the 
workforce without pushing up unemployment. 
Other indicators of labor demand also continue to signal strength.  Further, the near-term 
risks related to negotiations over the debt ceiling may be resolved with the pending two-year 
federal budget deal.  In addition to removing the near-term uncertainty about lifting the debt 
ceiling, the top-line budget authority levels in the agreement imply that government purchases 
will continue to contribute positively to real GDP growth in the current and coming years. 
And, finally, fears of escalation in trade tensions have faded somewhat since the June 
meeting, partly because of the discussions at the G-20 meetings in June.  These discussions were 
viewed by many as moving in the direction of an eventual agreement.  Even so, trade tensions 
remain elevated, and the outlook for trade agreements remains uncertain. 
Concerns about the slowdown in foreign activity have persisted.  Although the outlook 
for activity in Canada brightened a little, the staff forecasts for the economic performance of 
July 30-31, 2019
167 of 329


 
 
 
several important trading partners, especially China and the United Kingdom, have been 
downgraded again.  And, in the United Kingdom, this is complicated by new leadership and 
Brexit uncertainty. 
There’s also evidence that the uncertainties about global demand and trade policies are 
leading domestic businesses to delay or pull back on their planned investments.  U.S. 
manufacturing output has been declining so far this year, and indicators of business sentiment 
and the data on new orders are pointing to weakness in business investment in the second half of 
this year. 
It seems likely that the softening in activity in the business sector is tied to trade tensions 
and concerns about demand from abroad.  I’ve heard from several business contacts who are 
concerned about the upward cost pressures on their supply chains from abroad.  I’ve also heard 
worries that export demand has weakened.  And, to be sure, the incoming data suggest that 
economic activity abroad has continued to deteriorate, and this will present risks to the activity 
here at home. 
In addition, I continue to be concerned about the outlook for the agriculture sector.  
Agriculture producers, particularly farmers, continue to face significant challenges, and, overall, 
conditions have not improved.  The extreme flooding and continued wet conditions in the 
Midwest and other regions have resulted in significant delays in planting, decisions to replant 
due to washed-out fields, or in some cases farmers have simply not been able to get seed in the 
ground, with waterlogged fields not being able to support the weight of planting machinery and 
tractors. 
On the brighter side, I have seen evidence in my recent travels and heard reports from 
farmers that despite the unfavorable conditions, crop growth, particularly where corn was 
July 30-31, 2019
168 of 329


 
 
 
planted, has surprised to the upside, and there is optimism for decent yields and higher 
commodity prices.  Even so, the outlook for this year’s harvest is still highly uncertain, and many 
producers will rely heavily on the U.S. Department of Agriculture farm program payments. 
Another weak year for crop production will compound existing financial pressures for 
many farmers.  Opportunities to export farm products have likely diminished, on account of the 
emergence of trade replacement routes and continued oversupply of commodities in recent years.  
There have been some positive developments on the pricing front.  Corn prices, in particular, 
have moved up in recent weeks, likely reflecting the downgraded outlook for U.S. production.  
Even so, financial pressures on farmers continue to gradually increase.  Nonperforming loans 
have continued to edge up, carryover debt has continued to rise for many borrowers, and loans 
have continued to be restructured because of cash flow shortages. 
In some cases, farmers with long-paid-off land are amortizing operating debt over 
decades, secured by that equity.  While land values continue to hold at strong levels—and some 
reports indicate that they have increased—struggling producers who are determined to continue 
operations are taking on longer-term debt commitments in hopes of better outcomes. 
Elsewhere, the national statistics continue to suggest that households are faring well.  
Consumer spending growth rebounded strongly in the second quarter following the first quarter 
lull, and real disposable income is reported to have increased 3.2 percent over the past four 
quarters, a strong foundation for further gains in consumer spending in the second half of this 
year.  Readings on consumer sentiment have also remained upbeat. 
In summary, while I have maintained my optimism that the U.S. economy is fairly well 
positioned to withstand the current economic headwinds from softening demand from abroad, I 
acknowledge that the downside risks have remained prominent.  In particular, I see a risk that if 
July 30-31, 2019
169 of 329


 
 
 
the period of heightened uncertainty is prolonged, businesses will become more cautious and pull 
back on their long-term plans for hiring and capital investment, generating further negative 
feedback effects.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Regarding the local economy, growth in 
the Ninth District is characterized as modest.  Most sectors are reporting doing well.  Like in 
other regions of the country, firms are reporting difficulty hiring, with anecdotal evidence that 
firms are increasing overtime and overlooking attendance issues.  One staffing firm reported that 
“worker attendance has never been worse, and our percentage of no-call, no-show, and walk-offs 
has never been higher.”  We heard some evidence from contacts of wage increases of around $1 
an hour, around 8 percent, at typical low-wage jobs.  It seems like low-wage workers have a lot 
of choices today, which is good. 
On a less positive note, manufacturing in the District is slowing.  Several firms are 
reporting expansion plans being put on hold, and contacts point to uncertainty about market 
conditions amid trade tensions.  And, throughout my region, the concerns in the agriculture 
sector, as Governor Bowman just said, are widespread.  They’ve been going on for years. 
In the national economy, the intermeeting news has generally been positive, but inflation 
continues to run below target, and risks to the outlook remain large and tilted to the downside.  
Core inflation remains below target, as others have noted, with 12-month core PCE inflation 
coming in at 1.6 percent.  Market-based five-year, five-year-forward inflation compensation has 
risen a bit since the June meeting but remains quite low by historical standards. 
Regarding the real economy, Friday’s GDP report confirmed that consumption growth 
remains strong, but it also confirms that investment is very weak, and concern over trade 
July 30-31, 2019
170 of 329


 
 
 
tensions is likely playing a significant role.  No dramatic developments in the labor markets.  
Nonfarm payrolls bounced back in June from the weak May reading.  Average hourly earnings 
growth remains stable, around 3.2 percent.  The fact that wage growth is not rising indicates to 
me that the labor market is not overheating, and slack likely remains. 
Let me just take a second to endorse the Chair’s very clever comment in his testimony:  
“To call something ‘hot,’ you need to see some heat.”  I couldn’t have said it better myself.  
[Laughter]  A slowdown in the global economy seems ever clearer.  The Tealbook has marked 
down Q2 forecasts for China, Mexico, and the euro zone.  Inflation expectations appear to be 
falling globally.  On Thursday, Mario Draghi described the euro-zone outlook as “getting worse 
and worse,” with manufacturing especially hard hit.  The global PMI for manufacturing has 
dipped below 50, indicating likely contraction. 
Another indicator of a weak domestic and global outlook is low, long-term interest rates.  
The 10-year TIPS yield declined from over 1 percent around the end of last year to around 25 or 
30 basis points today.  This echoes comments from President Kaplan suggesting the neutral 
interest rate is very low.  So if we take a 10-year neutral rate of around 25 or 30 basis points, that 
says to me the neutral overnight real rate could be around 0 or maybe even negative.  If the 
neutral overnight interest rate is 0, with inflation of around 1.5 or 1.75 percent, that suggests that 
monetary policy is maybe 75 basis points, contractionary at this point.  I don’t think that we 
should be in a contractionary policy stance. 
So, in summary, the U.S. economy seems to be doing okay overall, but businesses seem 
somewhat pessimistic.  The global economy is weak, posing a threat to the continued U.S. 
expansion.  Inflation continues to run below target, and monetary policy appears to be 
contractionary.  Thank you. 
July 30-31, 2019
171 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I’ve been broadly reassured by developments since our 
June meeting.  Incoming data have confirmed consumer spending and employment are solid, 
financial conditions have been supportive, and important sources of policy uncertainty have been 
resolved. 
While global growth remains subdued, foreign authorities have pledged to provide 
additional support, and the important risks surrounding the leadership transition at the ECB have 
been resolved favorably.  Even inflation expectations have improved, although it’s too early to 
take much comfort from this. 
Against these positive developments, inflation remains below target, and business 
investment remains soft.  Let me briefly touch on each of these points.  The economy has been 
doing well, bolstered by confident consumers and a strong job market.  Real GDP rose at a 
2.1 percent annual rate last quarter following a 3.1 percent gain in the first quarter.  And 
consumer spending posted an annualized gain of 4.3 percent last quarter.  Recent data revisions 
boosted compensation notably, providing a positive support to consumer spending that will carry 
forward into the second half of this year.  By contrast, equipment investment by businesses has 
been lackluster, and indicators of business sentiment have been soft, with the notable exception 
of President Harker’s District.  [Laughter] 
The June job market data similarly provided reassurance that employment has continued 
to expand at a healthy pace.  Payrolls have risen at about a 170,000 monthly pace over the past 
three months—more than enough to provide jobs for new entrants.  The unemployment rate 
remains near a 50-year low, wages are growing a moderate pace, and the percentage of prime-
age adults who are employed is close to its pre-crisis peak. 
July 30-31, 2019
172 of 329


 
 
 
Importantly, initial claims for unemployment insurance have continued hovering around 
historic lows.  After fluctuations earlier in the year, financial markets currently are more 
conducive to near-term growth in economic activity than they were early in the year, with 
borrowing rates low and the stock market at all-time highs.  And, as of late last week, equity 
prices were up about 3 percent since our last meeting.  Spreads of corporate bond yields over 
Treasury security yields were down 20 to 30 basis points, and the dollar had depreciated about 0.5 
percent.  The 10-year Treasury yield is little changed from the last time we met.   
As we turn from the outlook to the distribution of risks, recent weeks have seen important 
downside risks recede.  The recent G-20 summit provided a critical shift in the landscape of 
potential trade conflict.  While most observers now put little weight on the possibility that tariffs 
will be lifted, the prospect of a significant escalation of trade conflict with China has diminished 
notably. 
In addition to the reduction in trade tensions, the budget deal removes a very significant 
source of downside risk that was clouding the outlook for this year and next.  The deal between 
the Administration and the Congress removes the threat of a near-term default and the sharp 
fiscal drag that would have resulted from the reimposition of sequester caps over the next 
two years. 
Despite the constructive change in tone on trade, business sentiment and investment plans 
will likely remain sensitive to uncertainty about trade and the global outlook.  With the notable 
exception of Canada, the incoming data on activity and foreign economies continue to paint a 
disappointing picture.  China posted a particularly weak second-quarter GDP reading.  
Purchasing managers’ indexes in many countries suggest outright contraction in the 
July 30-31, 2019
173 of 329


 
 
 
manufacturing sector.  And Germany’s export-intensive growth has been weak, with the auto 
sector projected to exert a drag through the end of the year. 
Against the backdrop of that ongoing weakness in activity and shortfalls of inflation, a 
number of foreign central banks have added accommodation or indicated they would do so soon.  
This broad-based global easing should help bolster demand as it gains traction. 
Over the past month, Europe has successfully navigated a set of major leadership 
transitions.  The ECB leadership transition removes a major risk by doubling down on the 
current policy posture and augers well for a continued proactive accommodative posture in the 
critically important euro-area economy. 
While the dollar depreciated over the intermeeting period, perhaps reflecting some 
reversal of earlier flight-to-quality pressures, the ongoing weakness abroad and resultant 
accommodation by foreign central banks suggest some risk of a future reversal of this 
depreciation. 
Downside risks remain, especially from abroad.  I’ve already noted risks from China and 
Germany.  The choice of the new British prime minister appears to increase the probability of a 
no-deal Brexit.  Against this backdrop, many indicators of the risk of recession remain somewhat 
elevated, although they have generally come down since earlier in the year.  That’s true not only 
for models that rely on the yield curve slope, but also for those that incorporate a broader set of 
indicators.  And I’ll continue to watch those recession probability indicators carefully. 
This morning we received the June reading on PCE prices.  We saw core PCE prices 
increasing 0.2 percent in June, and they are up 1.6 percent from a year earlier.  While inflation 
has been disappointingly soft this year, on a three-month basis there is some evidence of rising 
momentum. 
July 30-31, 2019
174 of 329


 
 
 
The Board staff model that separates common from idiosyncratic factors affecting 
inflation suggests an increase of 1.75 percent in common core inflation over the past 12 months, 
and the Dallas trimmed mean measure of inflation is coming in still around 2.0 percent.  We’ve 
also seen some encouraging developments on inflation expectations.  The latest reading from the 
Michigan survey was the strongest we’ve seen in some time, and inflation compensation has also 
moved up.  Three-year expectations in the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations also 
ticked up. 
Nonetheless, recent developments still suggest underlying inflation is running below our 
2 percent objective, and it has done so over the past several years.  A variety of statistical filters 
suggest underlying trend inflation is running around 1.8 percent, short of our target, and we need 
to remain visibly committed to moving inflation back up around 2 percent on a sustained basis. 
So, overall, the incoming data on the real economy are looking better than they were the 
last time we met.  And some important downside risks, notably for trade and fiscal policy, have 
receded, at least for now. 
I see the case for providing additional accommodation today relative to the case for 
watchfully waiting as finely balanced.  With financial conditions predicated on expectations of 
easing, I support proceeding with an adjustment in the policy rate, along with an end to the 
balance sheet roll-off to provide some insurance against those downside risks in the context of 
persistently soft inflation.  In coming periods, however, we risk being pulled by market 
expectations rather than guided by the data.  So it is important to use the occasion of this cut to 
gently realign market expectations and regain some optionality. 
As I will discuss tomorrow, I don’t currently see a need for further stimulus, and I’m 
somewhat reluctant to repeat the language that we used in June, which clearly signaled 
July 30-31, 2019
175 of 329


 
 
 
tomorrow’s cut.  And I’d like to see whether we can find some language that recalibrates us a 
little bit back to the May–June statement.  But that is tomorrow’s discussion.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles.  
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you.  And please note, Chairman, that after the Mahabharatan 
length of my first two interventions, my comments here are going to be mercifully brief.  
[Laughter] 
MR. CLARIDA.  There will be a quiz.  [Laughter]   
MR. EVANS.  There was a gesture over there.   
MR. QUARLES.  The macroeconomic environment seems as uncertain as at any time 
during my tenure on the Board.  Some aspects of the domestic data look quite good.  The labor 
market continues to be the best in generations, with low unemployment, better-than-expected 
labor force participation, and wage growth that’s not far from its pre-crisis trend.  Obviously, 
with the labor market doing so well, it’s not surprising that consumption has remained robust, 
with second-quarter measures growing at one of the fastest rates in the past decade. 
On the other side, there are some domestic sectors that are a source of concern.  In 
particular, as Governor Brainard and a number of you have noted, investment in equipment was 
almost flat through the first half of the year.  And there are growing signs, as Shaghil discussed 
in the international briefing, that trade uncertainty is starting to weigh on investment plans. 
On the other hand from that, some of the most recent indicators—including the June 
advanced durables report—have popped up.  I had thought, as President Kaplan suggested, that 
the threat of tariffs against Mexico in early May seemed to have moved us into a new normal of 
July 30-31, 2019
176 of 329


 
 
 
permanent trade uncertainty.  However, the most recent indicators suggest that the threat of 
tariffs had a shock effect that may be fading. 
Now, the staff expects  weakness in investment to persist, with a forecast of flat business 
investment in the second half.  I think it’s significant that, as the Tealbook describes, this 
forecast is taking a lot of signal from a sharp decline in analysts’ expectations for longer-term 
profit growth.  But this drop in profit expectations just reflects a turnaround from the sharp 
increase in growth expectations that followed the 2017 tax cuts. I think there’s a possibility that 
the sharp step-up in profit growth expectations following the tax cuts might be the anomaly here, 
as the tax cuts should have mostly affected the level of profits rather than the growth rate. 
So, overall, I think that the decline in profit expectations might be less informative than 
normal in the current circumstances, and that there might be some upside risk, as the economists 
say, to the staff’s outlook for falling investment.  I am not giving up yet.  So while the balance of 
domestic data is somewhat cloudy, the global economy more broadly is looking increasingly 
fragile, I think.  Manufacturing data continue to disappoint.  Growth appears to be slowing across 
a number of countries and regions. 
Trade tensions are likely a contributor to the slowdown but are probably not the whole 
story.  In particular, it looks like autos, which have, at least up to now, largely avoided tariffs, 
have taken a hit across the advanced and emerging economies.  More directly, weak foreign 
activity weighs on exports.  But apart from that quantitative effect, a fragile global outlook is 
also likely to depress business confidence and lower investment. 
As a final remark, I would simply note, in response to President Harker’s interesting 
comment about the lack of outflow of population from the west, which is an entirely sensible 
fact, there does not, however, seem to be any decline in the flow within the west of people from 
July 30-31, 2019
177 of 329


 
 
 
California into Utah, which I view as a major policy problem, but perhaps not one for this group.  
[Laughter]  Tomorrow I will discuss my view on the policy implications of the other factors I’ve 
covered today.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I will ignore the disparaging 
comment about Californians.  [Laughter] 
MR. KASHKARI.  As somebody who left California.  [Laughter] 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  First of all, Mr. Chair, is it possible to get another flag?  
Because I feel I would like to be a little closer to the flag [laughter] than to the map right now.   
CHAIR POWELL.  We’ll get to work on that.  [Laughter] 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  Economic data since our June meeting paint a 
picture of an economy growing at a moderate rate, although with very mixed signals across 
sectors.  Robust consumer spending is balanced by weakness in housing, business and fixed 
investment, and exports.  And I take more signal from the signs of slowing investment than from 
the free-spending consumers.  And I expect second-half growth, like the Tealbook, to step down 
to around trend rate. 
Indicators of inflation and inflation expectations have been uncomfortably subdued.  And 
looking beyond our borders, the global outlook for growth in inflation has continued to darken.  
The poor showing of business fixed investment, the decline in exports, and ongoing weakness in 
manufacturing suggest that the realities and uncertainties of trade policy, and of the state of the 
global economy more generally, are adversely affecting businesses’ willingness to invest.  
Although press reports of the trade skirmishes wax and wane, business contacts tell me that the 
July 30-31, 2019
178 of 329


 
 
 
pervasive uncertainty around trade and other policies is unlikely to go away anytime soon, and 
they are acting based on that assumption. 
Regarding the global outlook, the news over the intermeeting period, including the most 
recent PMIs, has been discouraging.  The latest IMF World Economic Outlook Update 
downgraded its projection for global growth and highlighted mounting disinflationary pressures 
with risks tilted to the downside.  In particular, the risk of a no-deal Brexit has moved to the 
forefront.  The situation in the euro area is particularly troubling.  As already mentioned, Mario 
Draghi said in his press conference on Thursday that the outlook for the euro area is getting 
“worse and worse.” 
In response to these continuing fragilities, the ECB and several other central banks have 
either adjusted or indicated they soon will adjust the stance of their monetary policies to provide 
more support for their economies.  However, on account of the already highly accommodative 
stance of policies in many jurisdictions, the ability of central banks to offset a downturn is quite 
limited, and a downturn abroad could spillover to weaker U.S. growth and inflation. 
The one clear bright spot is the resolution of uncertainty around U.S. fiscal policy and the 
looming debt ceiling.  The compromise agreement to raise spending caps and suspend the debt 
ceiling for the next two fiscal years eliminates, or at least significantly postpones, a major risk to 
the economy and financial system. 
In considering the risks to the outlook, and particularly the risk of a recession, we often 
focus on warning signs of trouble down the road, such as yield curve inversions, as a number of 
people have commented already.  But, more recently, some weakness in some indicators, 
especially for manufacturing, has led some commentators to conjecture that the economy may 
July 30-31, 2019
179 of 329


 
 
 
have already peaked or will soon do so.  That is, from their view, we may already be in the initial 
stages of a recession. 
My staff has looked into this question.  Because a widespread and persistent decline in 
economic activity characterizes the onset of recession, they took a big-data approach to 
measuring peaks in the business cycle and assessing real-time performance of various 
approaches using various techniques.  And after evaluating a wide range of methods, they found 
that, in fact, this well-known, simple rule of thumb that a 0.35 percentage point rise in the three-
month average of the unemployment rate from its recent low point is actually a very good 
measure and one of the best indicators of a peak in the overall economy.  My staff also found 
that there are other useful turning-point indicators based on the Conference Board jobs 
availability survey, job finding rates, and some cross-sectional measures of labor market and 
economic activity. 
So if you’re looking at the signals, whether it’s the unemployment rate rule of thumb or 
these other indicators, there’s really no evidence that the economy has already peaked.  This 
analysis also identified that cycles in manufacturing in recent decades have not been as closely 
associated with turning points of broad economic activity as they had in previous decades.  And 
the manufacturing recession of 2015 to 2016 is one good example. 
And this weakening of the link between the performance of the manufacturing sector and 
that of the general economy suggests that the recent slowdown that we’ve seen in manufacturing 
more likely signals a step-down in the overall growth rate of the economy rather than the start of 
something more broad based.  But it’s also important to remember that the 2015–16 episode 
happened at a time when the FOMC significantly shifted its policy view, in terms of the number 
July 30-31, 2019
180 of 329


 
 
 
of times the FOMC increased rates relative to expectations.  Did I slip into the policy discussion 
right there?  Okay. 
Regarding inflation, core PCE inflation is around 1.5 percent.  It’s well below our goal.  
And the recent annual revision to the data shows that underlying trend inflation is somewhat 
lower than we thought.  Measures of wage inflation, as a number of people have already 
commented, are quite muted.  And despite the tight labor market, wage growth remains below 
where it was prior to the recession.  And average hourly earnings growth, in fact, has slowed 
since earlier this year. 
And although indicators of inflation expectations have not changed substantially over the 
first half of the year, on net, measures based on the Michigan survey and the market-based 
measures are roughly 0.5 percentage point below the level that we saw around five years ago, a 
time when we thought they were at a level consistent with a 2 percent longer-run goal.  And this 
is something that I worry about in our discussions around measures of inflation expectations.  I 
do feel that sometimes in our focus on the ups and downs that invariably happen in these 
measures, we lose track of what the underlying question is. 
Are measures of inflation expectations where we want them, or have they moved perhaps 
very low or maybe to the low end of the range consistent with our target?  I feel that that is the 
case, and inflation expectations are quite low relative to history. 
This overall picture of a slowing domestic economy, weak global growth, and 
persistently low inflation calls for a somewhat more accommodative stance of monetary policy 
in order to maximize the probability that we achieve the desired outcomes of sustained economic 
growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent inflation goal in the 
medium term.  I will come back to those points in the discussion tomorrow.  Thank you. 
July 30-31, 2019
181 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks, everybody, for your comments.  I’ll offer 
my own.  At the June meeting, we saw a positive outlook but with risks from the crosscurrents of 
weak global growth and trade policy uncertainty.  We also had concerns about below-target 
inflation.  Our postmeeting statement said that we would carefully monitor the implications of 
incoming information and act as appropriate to sustain the expansion. 
Since then, the incoming U.S. economic data have been largely good news, and with 
some less good news.  Headline growth for the second quarter was 2.1 percent, a bit below staff 
expectations at the June meeting, but the composition of second-quarter growth was actually an 
improvement, with private domestic final purchases (PDFP) rebounding strongly.  PCE surged at 
an annual rate of 4.3 percent.  Business fixed investment, however, was down 0.6 percent, and 
manufacturing moved down again.  The solid June jobs report was a relief after May’s weak 
showing.  Job gains are running well below last year’s level but still are at a level more than high 
enough to absorb new entrants. 
Wages are rising, but not fast enough to put much upward pressure on inflation.  Core 
PCE prices rose only 1.6 percent in June from a year earlier.  Market-based measures of inflation 
compensation and the Michigan survey reading on inflation expectations have rebounded 
recently but remain low. 
Regarding the crosscurrents—and I’ll start with trade—it is true that talks between the 
United States and China are resuming today and tomorrow.  And we’re likely to know and 
outcome there is overnight and get a sense of the talks before our meeting tomorrow.  At least 
until hearing the outcome—and maybe well after that—I am reserving judgment.  I think all 
that’s really happened here is an agreement to have a meeting about having future meetings.  
[Laughter] 
July 30-31, 2019
182 of 329


 
 
 
By many, many accounts, the chances of a broad agreement in the near term are small, 
and the chances of further escalation remain quite real.  A lasting reduction of tensions with 
China, if that happens, may have to wait until after the 2020 election, and tensions with China 
and other countries could easily flare between now and then.  So from the standpoint of near-
term economic performance, even in the best likely case, trade uncertainty would remain a 
persistent feature of the economic landscape at reduced frequency.  Hope to be wrong, and I’ll 
hope for good news overnight. 
Global growth prospects remain dim, particularly in the euro area.  I’ll be yet another 
person to quote President Draghi last week as referring to the euro-area economy as “worse and 
worse,” a phrase that I suspect will be remembered, alongside others in his highly eventful term. 
President Draghi is trying to put together a broad easing package as he hands over the 
reins, and we certainly wish him success and expect success, but questions linger about the 
ECB’s remaining monetary policy space and the incremental effects of any easing moves.  
Hence, President Draghi’s repeated urging for fiscal policy, which seems the obvious answer—
except to those who have fiscal space to use. 
As for China, growth there has slowed sharply in the second quarter, as some temporary 
supports to activity faded.  Underlying demand remains weak, and business and consumer 
sentiment have deteriorated. 
In early June, financial markets were flashing clear warning signals, beginning at the Fed 
Listens’ Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices at the 
Chicago Fed.  Some of us, including yours truly, signaled our vigilance, and others followed suit.  
Financial conditions improved and are now much more growth friendly.  Had we stayed on the 
sidelines and continued to watch patiently, financial conditions would probably be in a very 
July 30-31, 2019
183 of 329


 
 
 
different place.  More to the point, the outlook for economic activity, predicated as it is on 
financial conditions, would be weaker. 
Regarding that outlook, according to the staff, real GDP growth will  edge down to 
roughly potential, as Vice Chair Williams suggested.  The staff continues to expect 12-month 
core PCE inflation to edge up closer to 2 percent in coming months but not actually to reach the 
2 percent target on a sustained basis in the forecast period.  And that is, to me, all too plausible. 
For many years, we have asserted that inflation would rise persistently to the 
neighborhood of 2 percent.  That forecast actually seemed on track for a good bit of last year.  
But, since December, we’ve all marked down our 2019 forecasts for core inflation and the 
federal funds rate, even if many of us did not write down an outright cut. 
Many of us have also revised down our estimates of u* and r*.  Since September, the 
median estimate of r* has declined 50 basis points, and the estimate of u* declined 30 basis 
points.  We are not in complete agreement, but, to a large degree, we are seeing the same 
things—lower stars, lower inflation, and an outlook supportive of more accommodative policy 
than we had previously expected. 
Finally, as some of you have noted, one of the risks of keeping interest rates low for a 
long time is that doing so may increase financial stability vulnerabilities.  For now, I concur with 
the staff’s assessment that, overall, such vulnerabilities are moderate.  Prices in asset markets, 
like equities and commercial real estate, are elevated.  Leveraged lending bears close watching, 
and high corporate debt could amplify a downturn, but leverage and maturity transformation in 
the financial system are low. 
We’ll, of course, continue to monitor developments, but I don’t believe the current 
financial stability concerns should deter us from adjusting policy if we see fit to do so to achieve 
July 30-31, 2019
184 of 329


 
 
 
a somewhat more accommodative stance.  On that note, I see the case for providing more 
accommodation at this meeting as persuasive, if not overwhelming.  The position of our 
economy relative to the dual-mandate goals is historically good.  The modal outlook is also 
reasonably good despite areas of weakness stemming from the crosscurrents we’ve been 
monitoring all year, particularly weak global growth and trade policy uncertainty. 
That positive outlook, though supported by the expectation of more accommodation, is 
still threatened by downside risks from the crosscurrents.  The threat is particularly salient given 
the proximity of the effective lower bound.  And we face what appears to be a more persistent 
shortfall of inflation below our symmetric 2 percent target. 
A rate cut tomorrow would be designed to sustain the expansion.  It would offset the 
ongoing drag coming from trade uncertainty and weak global real growth.  It would provide 
some insurance against further downside risks from these factors.  And it would promote a faster 
return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent target. 
I see the Committee as adjusting policy midcycle to a somewhat more accommodative 
stance, not beginning an extended loosening cycle, and I intend to make that clear.  I will also 
signal that future adjustments will depend on our assessments of the incoming data and risks to 
the outlook, if the Committee does decide to move. 
Thank you for a great set of comments, and that brings our go-round to an end.  And I 
will now turn it over to Trevor for the monetary policy briefing. 
MR. REEVE.8  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the handout labeled 
“Material for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 
As of your meeting six weeks ago, many of you concluded that the case for a 
somewhat more accommodative policy rate path had strengthened.  You signaled 
your willingness to act as appropriate to achieve your goals, while awaiting additional 
information.  The questions you now face are, what actions are appropriate to best 
 
8 The materials used by Mr. Reeve are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
July 30-31, 2019
185 of 329


 
 
 
promote your employment and inflation objectives?  And how should your 
communications explain these actions and shape expectations for the future? 
The upper-left panel lists some considerations that are relevant for your 
deliberations.  First, as many of you noted, the data on real activity received over the 
intermeeting period have been reassuring, although somewhat mixed.  Job gains 
bounced back in June, the unemployment rate remains low, and growth in household 
spending rebounded strongly in the second quarter.  On the other side of the ledger, 
business investment slowed to a standstill, and manufacturing output remains below 
its level at the beginning of the year. 
As Shaghil discussed in his presentation, sluggish real growth abroad has weighed 
on the U.S. outlook and continues to be a source of downside risk.  On the trade front, 
the risk of an imminent escalation in tariffs eased over the intermeeting period.  Even 
so, as shown in the upper-right panel, uncertainties about trade, as measured by the 
staff’s trade policy uncertainty index, remain elevated.  These uncertainties, along 
with weaker foreign demand, appear to have weighed appreciably on domestic 
investment, manufacturing, and trade and may continue to do so. 
The headwinds and risks posed by these global developments are likely 
contributing to the evolving view that lower interest rates may be required to achieve 
given economic outcomes.  This perspective is evident in the evolution of private 
forecasts for the U.S. economy.  The middle-left panel shows vintages of Blue Chip 
forecasts over the past year and a half.  The real GDP growth projections for 2019, 
the solid black line, and 2020, the dashed black line, have held roughly steady over 
time.  In contrast, the Blue Chip projections for short- and long-term interest rates, the 
red and blue lines, have declined about 1 percentage point.  The lower path of interest 
rates, reinforced by FOMC communications over the course of the year, has likely 
helped stabilize the outlook for the economy. 
Regarding consumer prices, recent data, on balance, have come in about as 
expected, consistent with the view that the weakness in PCE inflation seen earlier this 
year was in large part transitory.  Even so, inflation pressures clearly remain muted, 
despite the fact that the expansion is in its 11th year and the unemployment rate has 
remained at or below 4 percent for 16 consecutive months.  And as David noted in his 
presentation, the staff continues to project headline and core inflation to run slightly 
below 2 percent over the medium term. 
The middle-right panel shows the evolution of median projections from the SEP 
for core PCE inflation over recent years.  Each line shows a projection for a particular 
year, with the SEP vintage shown on the x-axis.  When projections for a given year 
are first made—roughly three years out—the typical forecast has been of 2 percent 
inflation.  With the passage of time, however, these forecasts have routinely been 
revised down, as inflation has continued to run below 2 percent.  While this time may 
be different, and 2 percent inflation could be around the corner, you may not find the 
historical record on this score to be all that reassuring.  In addition, both market- and 
survey-based indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are low by historical 
July 30-31, 2019
186 of 329


 
 
 
standards—suggesting that inflation expectations may be somewhat below, or may be 
at risk of moving below, the level consistent with your symmetric inflation objective. 
In the context of these developments, you may judge that had it not been for 
Federal Reserve communications signaling a somewhat easier policy stance, current 
financial conditions would be tighter, and the outlook for both the real economy and 
inflation would be weaker.  Hence, you may judge that a modest reduction in the 
target range for the federal funds rate is appropriate at this meeting, as in alternative 
B.  You may see that such an action is warranted to counter the headwinds and to 
guard against the risks posed by trade and global developments and to support the 
sustainable return of inflation to 2 percent. 
Alternatively, you may view the recent data flow as sufficiently strong to defer 
any decision to change the stance of policy, as in alternative C.  You may judge that 
global risks and uncertainties, while being important to monitor, do not at this time 
call for a policy response.  In this regard, you may be concerned that financial 
markets have gotten too far ahead of themselves in pricing in rate cuts and that some 
recalibration is warranted. 
Conversely, if you have greater concerns about the outlook, especially the risk 
that inflation expectations may be anchored at too low a level, you may favor a more 
aggressive policy easing at this time, as in alternative A. 
As Lorie noted, market participants widely expect you to lower the target range 
for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting.  Your communications 
regarding this presumed action will be important in shaping expectations for policy in 
the future.  The lower-left panel shows an options-derived probability distribution for 
the federal funds rate following your September meeting.  At this time, investors 
place roughly 65 percent odds on at least another 25 basis point reduction in the target 
range at that meeting and about a 30 percent probability on no change.  
While it is always difficult to predict how market participants will react to your 
policy statement and associated communications, the bottom-right panel highlights 
some aspects of alternative B that will likely draw attention.  First, although the 25 
basis point reduction in the target range is widely expected, the action will confirm 
recent Federal Reserve communications indicating that a somewhat easier stance of 
monetary policy is appropriate to achieve your objectives.  Second, retaining the 
reference to the Committee’s willingness to “act as appropriate” may signal continued 
openness to additional policy adjustments.  On the other hand, replacing “closely 
monitor” with “continue to monitor” may convey less imminent concern about the 
outlook.  Finally, the decision to end balance sheet runoff in August may reinforce 
perceptions that the Committee will be flexible in adjusting its policy in light of 
economic and financial developments. 
Thank you, Mr. Chair.  That completes my prepared remarks.  The June statement 
and the draft alternatives and implementation notes are shown on pages 2 to 11 of the 
handout.  I will be happy to take any questions. 
July 30-31, 2019
187 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  So if we wanted to be flexible going into September, would we 
want a 65 percent probability that we ease 25 basis points?  If the Committee adopts the 
language in alternative B for its statement following this meeting, do you think there will 
continue to be a 65 percent probability that we ease 25 basis points in September?  And I thought 
we’d want a number significantly lower than that if we truly wanted flexibility. 
MR. REEVE.  Well, I would say a couple of things about that.  One, as I said in my 
remarks, it’s always difficult to know how the market will fully react to the Committee’s 
statement.  I think, as Lorie noted, the expectations for this meeting are for the Committee to cut 
rates slightly more than 25 basis points, because it may be a little better probability on 30.  That 
difference between the language in alternative B and market expectations alone will likely shift 
the expected path for policy  slightly in the upward direction.  But I do think the odds the 
Committee will ease 25 basis points in September would remain high, maybe not necessarily 
higher than they are now.  I don’t know.  It depends on the whole package of communications, 
including the press conference. 
But, perhaps just as important, the probability that markets place on an easing in 
September is not going to be fixed in time between this meeting, the outcome tomorrow, and the 
time of your September meeting.  There will be a lot of information coming in over the 
intermeeting period that will affect market expectations for the path of future policy, including 
communications from all of you.  And what we have seen, certainly both in the recent 
intermeeting period and previously, is that policy expectations do maintain a pretty high 
sensitivity to data releases and economic news.  So my expectation would be that those 
July 30-31, 2019
188 of 329


 
 
 
probabilities would continue to evolve as September approaches and be importantly shaped by 
both the data and your communications. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Maybe I’ll offer a couple of comments.  I do want to have more 
optionality coming out of this meeting.  I do.  I think that’s appropriate.  I think that’s where the 
Committee is, and I just think there’s too much certainty priced in that we will ease 25 basis 
points. 
The worst time to change policy expectations is in the press conference.  We have a 
bunch of other shots to do that over the course of the intermeeting period, and I’m sensitive 
about coming in to the press conference and trying to move the probability the market places on 
a easing in September to zero or way far below where it is now.  You could get a very big market 
reaction then, and it would look like kind of a big surprise, which I don’t think is a great idea. 
What I’m planning to do, though, is to suggest that—I mean, the language I had written 
down is, “In contemplating potential future adjustments, we will continue to monitor the 
implications of incoming information.”  So “in contemplating any potential future adjustments” 
is what I’m going to say.  That suggests that you’re contemplating potential future adjustments.  
That suggests a slight probability of a cut in September—it’s a “data-dependent lean,” but it’s far 
short of certainty.  So I would think that would be the right tone to strike.  I mean, it’s very hard 
to get these things exactly right in real time, of course.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Two observations.  First, thank you, Trevor and team.  You definitely 
had an active six weeks since our June meeting.  I’d like to make two comments on two of the 
slides on page 1.  The first slide I’ll comment on is the one showing the evolution of Blue Chip 
forecasts, and Trevor made this point, but let me make it more explicitly.  I think this is very 
informative, and it dovetails with something that Chair Powell indicated. 
July 30-31, 2019
189 of 329


 
 
 
In September of last year, our median r* estimate on this Committee was 1 percent, and 
the median u* was 4.5 percent.  So, as the Chair indicated, the r* of the median participant is 
down 50 basis points and the u* is down 30 basis points.  And jam that into your John Taylor 
rule, and you’ll basically get about an 80 basis point easing relative to what would have been 
appropriate policy last September. 
What’s striking to me about this chart is that the Blue Chip forecasters, many if not most 
of whom actually get paid to do a really good forecast, have seen that the rate profile is down 
substantially.  The policy rate profile is down relative to where the Blue Chip forecasters were a 
year ago, and they have not changed their GDP forecast at all.  And that’s, at least in a first cut, 
indicative of this view that I and I think others around here have that there are these headwinds, 
and the appropriate policy rate path to get our desired outcomes has been adjusted.  So that’s a 
striking way to present that. 
The other thing I would mention is the companion chart to the right of the Blue Chip 
chart, and I’ve seen this type of chart as well.  I used to do versions of this chart in my earlier 
career.  But what I would say is, we’re thinking about the framework review, and we’re thinking 
about what maybe the Committee does in five or six years to look back on this period, and it 
would be nice if, at the end of our review, we set in place a process and a framework so that the 
picture for the years 2020 to 2025 does not have this pattern. 
It would be nice for the median projection from the SEP for core PCE inflation to be a 
straight line, because remember these projections are done under appropriate policy.  We’re 
basically saying in each of these median SEP projections under appropriate policy the outcome is 
inflation below our 2 percent target, and I think this gets at a concern that some of us have 
July 30-31, 2019
190 of 329


 
 
 
expressed about inflation expectations moving below levels consistent with our inflation 
objective.  But, anyway, that’s for tomorrow and down the road, but thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  This is just a very boneheaded question that I know has to be clear to 
everyone else around the table, but I’m just curious.  Paragraph 4 on alternative B—I had 
thought that we were ending our reduction in the balance sheet in September, and now we’re 
ending it in August, and a close study of the Julian calendar would suggest [laughter] that August 
is one month before September.  So what’s happening there? 
MR. REEVE.  So if you look at the implementation note— 
MR. QUARLES.  Oh, there’s an implementation note. 
MR. REEVE.  Yes, well, you don’t need to look at it.  The implementation note makes it 
clear that that change in policy is effective August 1.  The previous communications were that 
roll-off would finish at the end of September.  The current implementation note actually reflects 
two calendar months of a difference in timing.  This sentence in paragraph 4, whether helpfully 
or maybe a bit obscurely, doesn’t actually use the month “September” to try to avoid that 
particular confusion, but it is two months. 
MR. QUARLES.  Okay. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  We had this discussion, I guess, this morning.  I know we’ve been 
talking for some time here in various statements about sustaining the expansion, and it was 
talked about this morning, about how our goals should be sustained maximum employment and 
price stability. 
July 30-31, 2019
191 of 329


 
 
 
For me, I wonder about us, if not in this meeting, soon, weaning off “sustain the 
expansion” because I don’t think for me that is the same as achieving our dual-mandate goals of 
full employment and price stability over a sustained period of time.  I can imagine scenarios in 
which those could diverge, and I’d rather hang my hat on the second rather than the first.  But I’d 
like to raise that and just get other comments on this, because I know “sustain the expansion” has 
been embedded in our statement language here for some time now. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Could I ask a question about that?  So you’re saying there’s a 
scenario where you could have an end of the expansion that would be helpful to achieving our 
dual-mandate goals over the long term?  I don’t— 
MR. KAPLAN.  I guess I’m saying there are limits to what I would do to sustain the 
expansion.  In other words, if your goal really is to sustain the expansion at all costs, you might 
actually undertake monetary policy actions that make the next downturn more severe and may 
actually imperil your ability to achieve your dual mandate objectives.  It’s a nuance, but I’d want 
to just raise it. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Esther. 
MS. GEORGE.  Said another way, our mandate is clearly directed toward sustainable 
levels of maximum employment, as well as price stability.  So I just think you could run those in 
a direction in the interest of sustaining the expansion that may not actually fulfill those dual 
mandates. 
These colored lines in the SEP slide in Trevor’s briefing show that I’ve done a poor job 
here.  I guess when you look over the period displayed in the slide, there were varying levels of 
accommodation in place throughout.  Now, we’re talking here about a 25 basis point reduction 
with, if I read this right, no promise of others.  That we expect will turn the curve on inflation 
July 30-31, 2019
192 of 329


 
 
 
expectations?  Will it alter some of these headwinds we have been discussing in a way that—I 
just want to be clear about what you said your message was going to be, and— 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’m not trying to get to a completely neutral, patient place in the 
statement—we’re not looking in that direction.  That is not what I’m trying to accomplish, and I 
don’t think that’s where we are.  What I’m saying is that we will be data dependent in any 
potential further adjustments.  That’s what I’m saying.  I’m trying to inject data in there, because 
when you have a 25 basis point easing in September priced in at 70 percent probability, it’s not 
very data dependent.  So I’d like to move that back down.  I’m not looking to take the probability 
of a rate cut in September to zero, because I don’t think the probability is zero.  I’d like to create 
more optionality with this statement and then see how things play out.  Does that make sense? 
MS. GEORGE.  I think so, except what it suggests to me is, given what we’ve 
experienced over the past decade, it will take more, I assume, based on the discussions we’ve 
had, to alter those long-term inflation expectations. 
CHAIR POWELL.  My point is, we’re not making that decision today.  Tomorrow we’re 
making a decision, but we’re not deciding about September at this meeting.  And I think it’s a 
good thing that we have more optionality about what we do at the next meeting, right?  I mean, it 
may well be that some group supports doing another rate cut at the next meeting.  I don’t think 
we know that or need to decide that today, but I think it’s unhealthy to have the markets pricing a 
rate cut in September in to the  point they currently have  I think this is the right time to adjust 
market expectations to create more optionality.  I’m just reluctant to do it in a way that’s very 
disruptive and confusing to the markets.  That’s all.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  I completely concur with what you just said.  This is not about what you 
just said about tomorrow, but I’m going to follow up on President George’s point.  So one of the 
July 30-31, 2019
193 of 329


 
 
 
tensions that I think is arising that we should talk about, perhaps, is that when you’re data 
dependent and then we put a portfolio of data together that we’ll look at, but then we’re also 
looking at this SEP chart here, which we don’t really emphasize as much—this is a chart that’s 
different, in my read, from just muted inflation pressures of a tenth or two.  This is saying we’ve 
persistently missed.  And at some point we have to decide, I think, as a Committee—will we 
really go for moving inflation expectations and inflation up, and is that different from watching 
incoming headwinds and judging whether they are so much, they’ll push us back or not?  And 
I’m not suggesting you do that tomorrow, but I do think, ongoing, that’s the tension in the 
language—that we’re trying to accomplish, with one set of language, two different kinds of 
things, and it may not fit under that big tent forever. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’ll just say, I would never say that we will do whatever it takes to 
get inflation up to our 2 percent target, because we don’t know whether we can.  Nonetheless, I 
think it is a good thing to be seen to be using your tools to support inflation moving up..  That’s 
why I’m trying to characterize this as a midcycle adjustment to a somewhat more 
accommodative policy stance.  We’re not saying that we’re just going to keep cranking the 
federal funds rate down until inflation gets over 2 percent. 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  One thought about creating optionality based on this chart 
number three here in exhibit 1 is that sometimes we would say, “Okay, this looks like a small 
move, because it’s only 25 basis points,” but earlier this year we took some other tightening off 
the table, and now we’re adding one cut to it.  So we’ve actually done quite a bit in the first six 
months of the year.  The Committee, I think, in the past would have said, “Well, we’ve done 
quite a bit here.  Let’s wait and see how the data come in, see if this has the kinds of effects that 
July 30-31, 2019
194 of 329


 
 
 
we thought,” so that that will take away the market expecting that if something doesn’t happen 
during the intermeeting period, we’ve got to move again.  I think we can credibly make the case 
that we’ve done a lot, and it’s time to wait and see the effects of our action. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  I agree with President Bullard on that.  It does seem like we’ve done a lot 
relative to December.  I thought President George’s question was a really good one, because it’s 
so easy to say, “It’s only 25 basis points.”  Is that really going to make a big difference to the 
outlook?  And I was chuckling because, yes, that’s true.  You know, it is only 25 basis points. 
I go back to December, and I thought that was only 25 basis points too, and the 
continuation of the balance sheet adjustment was just what we’d been saying we were going to 
do anyway.  And so I view this as, it’s only 25 if we do alternative B.  I get that.  But I think it’s 
trying to indicate that we’re alert to the risks and clued in, and we’ll see how things progress—
the data dependence and all of that.  So I think that it’s more than 25 in terms of its effect, and, 
combined with what we didn’t do after December, it’s probably even more.  But it’s a totally 
valid question and concern. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Hearing none, seeing 
none, we adjourn to the elegant West Court Café, as always.  See you at nine o’clock tomorrow 
morning.  Thanks, everybody. 
[Meeting recessed] 
 
 
July 30-31, 2019
195 of 329


 
 
 
 
July 31 Session 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  Before we get started today, I want 
everyone to join me in congratulating one of our number on a very special achievement.  On this 
very day, Jim Clouse celebrates 30 years at the Fed.  [Applause]  I think we all know Jim is 
tremendously valuable in his work here.  He will also shortly turn 60, which means that he’s 
spent half of his life here at the Fed.  [Laughter]  Anyway, thank you so much, Jim. 
All right.  Let’s get started again.  David, do you have a data update for us? 
MR. LEBOW.  I do.  This morning we received the employment cost index for June.  For 
private industry workers, the numbers for total compensation were a 2.1 percent annual rate of 
increase over the three months ending in June or 2.6 percent over the past 12 months ending in 
June.  That’s a little bit below our Tealbook estimate of a 2.8 percent increase over the past 12 
months.  The downward surprise was in benefits, not wages and salaries.  We don’t yet know the 
components of benefits—we get that information later today.  So, more evidence that wage gains 
remain moderate. 
This morning we also received ADP’s public estimate of their employment change for 
the month of July.  This is distinct from the weekly ADP figures I reported yesterday.  They 
estimate a 156,000 increase in private employment in July—so, not very different from our 
Tealbook estimate on which I reported yesterday.  
CHAIR POWELL.  Great.  Thank you.  Questions for David?  [No response]  If not, let’s 
begin our policy go-round.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I support alternative B as written.  I support 
the policy decision to lower the funds rate target range by 25 basis points and to conclude in 
August the process of reducing the holdings of securities in the SOMA. 
July 30-31, 2019
196 of 329


 
 
 
I’m glad to see in the statement that we acknowledge that “measures of inflation 
compensation remain low.”  Yes, they have rebounded since our June meeting, but only because 
a somewhat more accommodative policy stance has been priced in. 
Regardless, breakeven inflation rates remain some 30 basis points below the levels that 
prevailed before the financial crisis.  We continue in the statement to state that “survey-based 
measures of . . . inflation expectations are little changed,” but, of course, at least in the Michigan 
survey, they’re little changed at a historically very low level.  And, as I think was pointed out 
yesterday during the economic outlook go-round, if the measures of expected inflation that we 
consult were consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective in 2005 and 2006, then, since 
they’re lower now, they probably are not consistent with the objective.  Indeed, the staff 
estimates of inflation expectations based on TIPS, which correct for liquidity and term premium 
effects in the TIPS market, suggest that conclusion. 
In regard to the way forward for policy, I’d like to make three points.  Again, u* 
estimates of Committee participants have been trending down.  Many of us have a u* of around 4 
percent, and, obviously, if u* is lower, then that means that the output gap is smaller, putting less 
upward pressure on inflation.  And, as I mentioned yesterday, I do think this is a downside risk to 
our outlook for returning to 2 percent inflation. 
With regard to inflation expectations, obviously, they’re not something that we directly 
observe.  But I, for one, think it’s important to try to do our best to understand where inflation 
expectations are moving and to communicate that inflation expectations are one factor that enters 
into our policy thinking. 
Finally, I’d like to conclude with a little calculation to address head-on this issue of data 
dependence in our reaction function.  So I want to begin with a 1993 Taylor rule, but I’m going 
July 30-31, 2019
197 of 329


 
 
 
to use our June SEP estimates of r* and u* as the inputs to that Taylor rule.  If you take the data 
that we have as of today on core PCE inflation over the past year and on unemployment and you 
use John Taylor’s coefficients, you end up with a Taylor rule policy rate, given current data and 
the r* and u* in the SEP, of around 2.4 percent. 
Let’s recall that, in September 2018—which, coincidentally, was my first meeting as a 
Fed Governor—the SEP median showed an r* of 1 percent and a u* of 4.5 percent.  Since then, 
Committee participants have been revising down estimates of the “star” variables based on the 
incoming data that we’ve seen.  If you take the 50 basis point adjustment in r* and the 30 basis 
point adjustment in u*, that accounts for most of the projected shift down in the policy rate path 
since our September meeting. 
So I support our policy decision today while acknowledging that it does imply a top end 
for the target range of the federal funds rate that’s about 15 basis points below the Taylor rule 
calculation.  But I believe this is justified for prudent risk-management considerations, given the 
downside risk I see to inflation.  Thank you, Chair Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  But, like 
President George yesterday, I wonder if this will really be enough—most likely, for different 
reasons, given that she’s on the map side of the room.  [Laughter] 
Relative to June, my confidence that the economic expansion is on track has increased.  
The data on economic activity have largely met or beat expectations, and some of the potholes 
we were worried about have been avoided—for example, the federal budget accord avoids a debt 
ceiling event this year.  Against this backdrop, it seems like we could stand pat and wait for more 
data.   
July 30-31, 2019
198 of 329


 
 
 
I know, at this point, it sounds like I might be arguing for alt-C, but the intermeeting data 
are only part of the story.  And, along lines similar to Governor Clarida, I want to go through just 
some simple arithmetic that helped me.  If you compare the current situation that we are in today 
with where we were in March, the median SEP participant in March had no change in the funds 
rate over the course of 2019, and the median estimate of long-run r* in the March SEP was 0.8 
percent.  In contrast, in the June SEP, the median r* had fallen to 0.5 percent, implying a 30 
basis point decline in the long-run funds rate.  So if we assume that short-run r* is at least as low 
as this long-run number, this implies we need one rate cut this year just to keep the stance of 
policy unchanged from March.  And that was a time when we characterized the economy and our 
policy as being in a good place.  
So why move beyond this simple rebalancing, recalibrating policy to where we were in 
March?  What’s the case for further cuts this year?  I find two arguments most persuasive.  First, 
as we discussed yesterday, we face one-sided risk in our ability to control the path of policy.  
One way to take insurance against this risk is to recognize the estimated nature of our star 
variables, especially r*.  Estimates of r* are highly uncertain and have fallen steadily over the 
past several years, and there is some downside risk to further declines, given the lower interest 
rates in foreign countries. 
Vasco Curdia’s presentation yesterday, based on the framework memo, makes the case 
for insuring against the downside risk to further declines in r* by using the lower range of r* 
estimates when setting policy, rather than the mean or median values.  Under that scenario, if r* 
turns out to be higher than we think—we’ve made that mistake—and, hence, policy is too 
accommodative, we can easily course-correct by raising interest rates, particularly since a 
July 30-31, 2019
199 of 329


 
 
 
nonlinear effect on inflation or a jump in inflation, is highly unlikely, as work by not only the 
San Francisco Fed, but also many other people in the System, has documented. 
If, on the other hand, r* is lower than we think, policy will be too tight, and the effective 
lower bound (ELB) will limit our room to adjust.  In other words, in such a close proximity to 
the effective lower bound, it’s important to err on the side of being too accommodative relative 
to our estimated r* rather than too restrictive. 
Now, a related but different rationale comes from considering inflation.  Inflation 
projections for this year and next have come down since March by at least a couple of tenths of a 
percentage point.  And, given the volatility of the data and the imprecision of monetary policy, 
inflation of 1.8 percent or 1.7 percent may feel close enough to our 2 percent target.  However, as 
we all discussed yesterday, if we consistently miss our inflation objective to the downside, 
despite an apparently strong economy and a tight labor market, the public will increasingly 
incorporate these sustained low inflation readings into their expectations.  And my concern is, 
they won’t anchor on the 2 percent inflation target we talk about, but on the less than 2 percent 
inflation we deliver.  This is a challenge that Europe is currently facing, and, of course, Japan has 
lost that battle and is now fighting a completely different war. 
In more tangible terms, lower actual and expected inflation—even if just a few tenths—
translates into less conventional policy space should a negative shock occur.  If, for example, 
inflation expectations are 0.25 percentage point below our target when the next downturn arrives, 
and so are nominal interest rates, this translates into one rate cut fewer that we have at our 
disposal.  When I look at that, it simply says that underrunning the inflation target on a consistent 
basis limits our conventional policy space, making it more likely we will hit the ELB and then be 
forced to turn to less-proven, less-certain unconventional policy tools. 
July 30-31, 2019
200 of 329


 
 
 
Finally, as we discussed yesterday—and I think it’s very important—we have to consider 
our policy decisions in the context of financial stability.  But, like many, I see the best protection 
against financial stability risks as being our macroprudential tools.  So I would like to see the 
countercyclical capital buffer being deployed or the stress tests becoming tougher before using a 
blunter tool like monetary policy to address financial stability concerns.  In the end, I would hate 
to see us err on the side of holding back insurance accommodation for low r* or low inflation to 
solve for potential imbalances in the financial system, which we could treat first with other tools. 
So, in sum, weighing the risks of further declines in r* and continuing low inflation 
versus creating imbalances that can be corrected with other tools, I come out currently thinking 
that we should be adjusting our policy rate path downward.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  We did not make a policy rate move at the 
June meeting but signaled a likely move at the current meeting.  Accordingly, markets have 
placed a 100 percent probability on a 25 basis point move or more for today.  In my view, we 
essentially already made this move at the previous meeting, at least in terms of influencing 
market pricing, and now we need to ratify that decision.  This is not my preferred way for the 
Committee to operate, but, nevertheless, I think we will be fine with alternative B today. 
I think we may need to move again at coming meetings in order to position the policy 
rate appropriately, given current global macroeconomic conditions.  But I would like to avoid 
having the market place a 100 percent probability on another move occurring at the September 
meeting.  One way we may be able to accomplish this is to emphasize the sea change in U.S. and 
global monetary policy that has occurred during 2019.  In the second half of 2018, there was a 
widespread view that rates would be normalized considerably further, perhaps by as much as 
July 30-31, 2019
201 of 329


 
 
 
100 basis points, in order to contain incipient inflation pressures associated with an economy that 
continued to surprise to the upside. 
The Committee has, generally speaking, stepped back from that view and now sees the 
current level of the policy rate as a bit high relative to the level that would return inflation to 
target or, preferably, above target over the forecast horizon.  Arguably, with another rate 
reduction in train, this has been a swing of as much as 150 basis points on the level of the policy 
rate relative to expectations in late 2018.  Given this large swing, it is likely appropriate that the 
Committee now takes a wait-and-see posture heading into the next few meetings to measure the 
effects of these actions.  I hope we will see more evidence during the fall of a re-centering of 
inflation and inflation expectations at our 2 percent target.  As an example:  The TIPS 
breakevens were up about 15 basis points on the news coming out of the June meeting.  I 
interpret this as a somewhat higher market-based inflation expectation, given the dovish surprise 
at that meeting. 
I think we can also argue that today’s move provides some insurance against a sharper-
than-expected slowdown in the U.S. economy.  We already expect the economy to slow to trend 
growth, and that trend growth is itself not particularly high compared with U.S. historical 
averages.  Much of this slowdown is, in fact, happening during 2019.  Real GDP growth is 
slower, on a year-over-year basis, than it was last year.  Job growth is also slower this year than 
it was last year. 
The uncertainty around global trade arrangements has increased significantly and, in my 
view, is unlikely to return to normal levels over the forecast horizon.  We’re just going to have to 
live with trade uncertainty.  This is having a much larger effect outside the United States than it 
is inside the United States, slowing global growth, and this may feed back into deteriorating U.S. 
July 30-31, 2019
202 of 329


 
 
 
macro performance.  A positive aspect of our present policy is to encourage continued strong 
labor market performance that should especially benefit groups of workers that have historically 
had higher rates of unemployment. 
I continue to be concerned about yield curve inversion.  I agree with President Kaplan’s 
comments yesterday that the inversion suggests that our policy rate setting is somewhat out of 
alignment with respect to market fundamentals.  The slope of the yield curve between the 2-year 
maturity and the 10-year maturity is not inverted at this point, which gives me some comfort that 
there is not a recession signal coming from yield curve inversions between other rates within the 
curve.  So I think that we can make some small adjustments beginning today, and then we’ll 
again see an upward-sloping curve soon. 
Finally, I would say it’s not unusual to search for the right level of the policy rate 
following the end of a normalization cycle; the 1995–96 period was very much like this.  The 
Committee had to feel its way around in the meetings following the end of the normalization 
cycle at that juncture.  They did so successfully and set up the economy for an excellent second 
half of the 1990s, one of the best periods of macroeconomic performance in U.S. postwar 
history. 
On alternative B itself, I would just make one comment.  I would prefer not to raise the 
balance sheet issue again.  I think that we’ve already made a decision on the balance sheet.  I 
would be willing to live with that decision.  I think if we were asked about it, we could just say, 
“Well, the balance sheet runoff is ending anyway, so we just left that decision alone.”  I think 
that, by putting paragraph 4 in here, we may be inadvertently raising the specter that balance 
sheet policy would again become an active tool of policy.  My sense is that the Committee 
doesn’t want to do that any time soon. 
July 30-31, 2019
203 of 329


 
 
 
So if it was just me, I would strike paragraph 4.  I understand that some people may want 
this paragraph in here, and I can live with it.  I do think we can make our way with this 
paragraph, but my preference would be not to raise this issue at this juncture.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative C for this meeting.  
Easing today when the data since the past meeting have been favorable seems at odds with the 
data dependence that we have emphasized so much recently. 
In light of the favorable data since June, the decision to reduce rates at this meeting poses 
significant communication challenges.  Numerous investment letters and private forecasters are 
speculating that our reaction function has changed.  You may recall that the communications 
paper at the Chicago Fed Listens conference emphasized that being clear about our reaction 
function is an important focal point.  That there is speculation that we have changed our reaction 
function without adequate communication is problematic. 
At this point, I do not find heightened uncertainty a compelling case for easing.  Many 
measures of uncertainty are not elevated.  While trade uncertainty is elevated, the effects to date 
are largely in the forecast, and those effects are modest.  It is difficult to know when and in what 
way this uncertainty will be resolved. 
One rationale for easing is to take out insurance against the possibility that the trade war 
will intensify and the global manufacturing slowdown will snowball into a full-blown global 
recession.  These concerns might be heightened, given our relative proximity to the ELB.  
However, I would prefer policy not to get too far ahead of the actual data.  If these concerns 
materialize, I would support easing at that time. 
July 30-31, 2019
204 of 329


 
 
 
Finally, this action seems to turn the punch bowl metaphor on its head.  Rather than 
taking the punch bowl away, we’re arguably spiking it.  Should an asset price collapse be a 
driver in the next economic downturn, it will be hard to explain what tradeoff we are weighing at 
this meeting when asset prices are inflated on the one hand while unemployment is near 
historical lows and inflation is forecast to be close to target by the end of the year on the other.  
That is to say, I am worried about the financial stability implications of easing when the 
economy is relatively strong and financial markets are exuberant.  The past several recessions 
were caused not by reaction to inflation concerns but rather by the failure to address financial 
stability concerns in a timely manner.  In summary, with unemployment near 50-year lows, 
trimmed-mean PCE inflation at 2 percent and core PCE inflation likely to rise, many measures of 
uncertainty not unusually elevated, and financial stability concerns rising with stock prices and 
corporate leverage near all-time highs, I see no need for additional monetary accommodation at 
this time. 
I find this press conference likely to be a substantial communications challenge.  The best 
way to go into a press conference is with a simple and clear message.  I think that’s difficult at 
this time because, if you use r* as the reason for easing at this time, micromanaging a difficult-
to-precisely-measure r* is, I think, a difficult argument to make.  If we focus on global 
conditions, a challenging logical question would be, why should we move to ease policy before 
central banks whose countries are much weaker?  And, finally, if you’re worried about low 
inflation, to get to President George’s question yesterday, with one move in rates, it’s difficult to 
alter inflation expectations. 
July 30-31, 2019
205 of 329


 
 
 
So I think it is a difficult message to deliver.  I hope others can provide that simple, 
clear message that I’m missing right now.  And I wish the Chair luck at the press conference.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic.  
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support the policy action as described in 
alternative C. 
I agree with President Bullard—this action that’s proposed in alterative B ratifies a signal 
that was sent earlier.  But the scope of the action and the accompanying explanation in 
alternative B are troubling for me.  Let me explain.  The case for a rate cut, as I see it, rests on 
one of three fairly distinct arguments.  The first is that the data suggest that the economy has 
weakened and there’s a plausibly high probability of a turning point in the cycle.  I don’t think 
anyone at this table is in that camp. 
An alternative rationale is that the level of uncertainty and the risks to the outlook are 
sufficiently elevated that one or more insurance cuts are prudent on risk-management terms.  
This, I believe, is the reason that is motivating much of the Committee.  As I noted in my 
comments in the economic go-round, this view does not mesh with the feedback received from 
my contacts and directors.  Policy and global real growth risks do persist, but I don’t hear the 
sentiment that they are accelerating or that uncertainty is growing.  If anything, businesses, 
having gone through several iterations of contingency planning related to trade exposures, seem 
to be better positioned to deal with the negative surprises should they come. 
That leaves a possibility that global risk attitudes, having depressed market yields on safe 
assets, have lowered the policy rate that is consistent with a neutral stance of policy.  I think a 
neutral stance is appropriate given my read on the state of the economy relative to our dual 
July 30-31, 2019
206 of 329


 
 
 
mandate.  So this rationale is harder for me to dismiss than the other two.  But two points on this.  
First, if the yield curve is telling us that we need to adjust monetary policy to keep the stance 
neutral, it seems to me the more assertive policy adjustment in alternative A feels more 
appropriate than the 25 basis point cut in alternative B, though I’m not supportive of the 
reasoning given for the move outlined in alternative A.  This is the last point that President 
Rosengren raised.  If we are convinced that the inverted yield curve is telling us we are north of 
neutral, then we should take actions to get back to neutral as quickly and as boldly as possible. 
Second, I would feel a lot more comfortable with a rate cut at this meeting if the rhetoric 
supporting this move was based on a defensive adjustment to developments that require a move 
to maintain a neutral policy stance in the context of an economic outlook that is otherwise just 
fine.  But that is not how I believe we have set up this move.  It is certainly not how it is going to 
be perceived, in my view.  Although it is better now than in earlier drafts, the language in both 
alternative A and alternative B still clearly suggests that, because of risks, we have downgraded 
our outlook for the economy. 
I will share an anecdote from one of my Branch directors, who represents a very large 
national and international manufacturing firm.  This director noted that last month, his company 
had slightly downshifted production volumes despite positive readings on all of the business 
indicators they typically use to make such decisions.  The reason was, in fact, that they are taking 
on board additional downside risks.  The kicker is that our director indicated that recent Fed talk 
about loosening policy in the face of risks played a role in their assessment.  This was not an 
isolated comment.  In fact, the apparent disconnect between our views and what businesses see 
from their perspective proved to be a dominant and, I might add, unsolicited theme in my Atlanta 
board of directors meeting last Thursday. 
July 30-31, 2019
207 of 329


 
 
 
I don’t want to overstate the case.  Exposure to international trade disruptions is clearly 
real, but even those contacts most exposed to trade and global economic developments recognize 
that their challenges are not universally shared across the economy.  And I have been receiving 
the very clear message that the sentiment that is creeping into business planning is, what does the 
Fed know that we don’t? 
The upshot is that I fear we are providing, in President Evans’s terminology, some 
negative Delphic guidance.  If we persist in conditioning the public for yet more rate cuts in the 
absence of data suggesting a discernible softening of the trajectory of the economy, I think the 
risk of negatively affecting sentiment in this decisionmaking is real. 
I’d also like to make some comments about the decision to conclude the reduction of our 
security holdings effective August 1.  Terminating the balance sheet rundown two months early 
isn’t going to make a material difference in the stance of policy either way.  So the decision 
obviously comes down to the question of what we intend to signal with this aspect of the policy 
decision.  Our position—or, at least, my position—has been that the effect of our balance sheet 
reduction has been de minimis.  If there has been any quantitative effect, it has not shown up in 
term premiums or, at least, has been swamped by other factors easing financial conditions.   
Accordingly, the Committee had decided that the best course was to gear our asset 
management to longer-run issues related to the desired size of our balance sheet, driven by 
considerations about the effective implementation of monetary policy.  Balance sheet policy, in 
other words, was to be moved to the background, and interest rates would be the primary 
instrument for adjusting the stance of policy. 
So, what has changed?  A logical, though unstated, conclusion from the proposed balance 
sheet policy shift is that we are sufficiently concerned about the need to provide additional 
July 30-31, 2019
208 of 329


 
 
 
stimulus that we are willing to break from our earlier commitment and from the rationale that 
supported that commitment.  I do understand the counter to this position.  We took great pains 
earlier in the year to disabuse markets of the view that our balance sheet policies were locked in, 
come hell or high water.  I also understand that a rate cut without a halt to the balance sheet 
reductions could and likely would open the gates to negative commentary and the accusation of 
incoherence in our approach.  And maybe this should be determinative.  But if our announced 
policy plans and the reasons for them are taken seriously, then the double barrel of a rate cut and 
the early halting of balance sheet reduction will indicate that we believe that a serious reversal of 
fortune for the U.S. economy may be looming. 
This doubling down is exactly what worries me about this policy decision and statement.  
We need to strongly and clearly hammer the message that we expect the economy to remain 
strong.  Alternative B does say this, but I feel the message gets lost amid the signals about a 
weakening outlook.  I am very concerned that our subtlety in language will be too subtle, and 
that expectations will not adjust the way many of us hope.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support no change in the target range for the 
federal funds rate at this meeting.  The economic information that has come in over the 
intermeeting period has been largely positive, and the downside risks to the forecast have 
moderated somewhat since our previous meeting. 
As President Bostic found, business contacts in my District are coping with the 
uncertainty over trade policy.  Though they’re experiencing some slowdown in activity 
compared with last year, they expect growth to continue at its trend pace. 
July 30-31, 2019
209 of 329


 
 
 
My modal forecast remains that growth will slow to a trend pace of 2 percent, that labor 
market conditions will remain strong, and that inflation will move gradually back up to 
2 percent.  In this context, I don’t see a compelling argument for cutting the funds rate at this 
time and would prefer that we continue to monitor incoming economic and financial information 
and assess the outlook and risks before making a change in our policy rate. 
I realize that not everyone did, but if one believes that the funds rate was at the 
appropriate level at the time of our previous meeting, it’s difficult to explain why we need a 
lower funds rate now, given that the data have improved and the risks of a weak-growth scenario 
have moderated.  The economy has grown at an above-trend pace over the first half of the year, 
and labor markets are strong.  Inflation has been running under 2 percent, but I don’t view that 
undershoot as overly concerning, since the data and models suggest that inflation will be firming 
over time.  And even if one were concerned, with the majority of components of core inflation 
being acyclical, I’m skeptical that one or two 25 basis point cuts in the federal funds rate are 
going to do much to speed up a return to 2 percent inflation.  In fact, implying that it could do so 
could very well be counterproductive, because if those actions don’t generate stronger inflation 
because of the structural or idiosyncratic factors, it will undermine our credibility, not enhance it. 
More than half of PCE inflation is acyclical or structural.  So either we need to be much 
more aggressive with our policy in order to encourage a faster increase in the cyclical 
components to engender a faster return of inflation to target or we need to be more patient as the 
cyclical components rise with continued strength in the labor market. 
Now, one can consider this strategy an opportunistic approach to inflation.  To avoid 
deleterious effects on inflation expectations, we need to explain that this is our strategy.  My 
preference is to take this patient approach, given that our forecasts still have inflation gradually 
July 30-31, 2019
210 of 329


 
 
 
moving up.  Currently, readings are not far from our goal, and inflation expectations remain well 
anchored.  This strategy worked well in the 2014–16 period. 
President Evans’s framing yesterday of a question thinking about the costs of running the 
economy hot was salient for me.  I’ve been thinking about this for a while, and, aside from any 
imbalances in financial stability, I think there are costs that come through the structural side of 
things—distortions in decisions of both workers and business owners.  For workers, it’s perhaps 
opting for working versus getting more education, which can affect their future productivity.  For 
businesses, it’s focusing on retaining and attracting workers rather than focusing on improving 
product offerings.  In fact, several of our business contacts on our advisory council have 
mentioned that their ability to innovate has been lessened by how much time they’re spending on 
recruiting.  So these both can be thought of as maybe a shifting intention from future benefits to 
current benefits, a type of short-termism that can affect longer-run productivity.  And I think it’s 
related to some of our discussion yesterday about sustainability in these tradeoffs. 
So, obviously, these ideas aren’t well formulated yet.  But I think they’re worth 
considering, and they really make me think that patience is likely to be more consistent with our 
balanced approach. 
Now, intermeeting communications may have likely precluded the ability to leave the 
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged today.  Given the situation we’re in, I believe 
we have a very difficult communications challenge, so I agree with President Rosengren.  You 
know, is the reason that we’re cutting rates today the inverted yield curve?  Is it because inflation 
readings are low?  Is it because the overall outlook for growth and inflation has changed 
significantly?  Without a clearly articulated rationale for making a cut today, today’s actions 
July 30-31, 2019
211 of 329


 
 
 
could be read as the beginning of a series of cuts, which could be destabilizing.  It could be 
misleading, as President Bostic said, about our own outlook. 
It could undermine efforts that have been taken to clarify our reaction function.  Now, 
this is particularly a risk in my mind if we use the language from the June statement about 
uncertainty, which I took as a signal that we were ready to act in July.  And I noticed that was 
reintroduced on Monday in the language in the statement. 
Also, it isn’t clear to me what will happen to the yield curve slope after today’s cut.  
Markets are expecting more than 25 basis points of easing this year.  So it could be that the yield 
curve remains inverted. 
Former Chair Ben Bernanke’s “hall of mirrors” idea seems relevant here.  If the FOMC is 
trying to infer signals from the market but the market is trying to anticipate what our policy 
actions will be, then by following the market, we could be driving rates away from fundamentals, 
not bringing them into alignment.  And then, what will we do?  Will we have to take another 
action? 
I agree with others that the proposed balance sheet action poses another communications 
challenge.  Halting our balance sheet runoff a couple of months earlier than previously 
announced seems to run counter to our statement that we’re going to use the interest rate tool as 
our main policy tool.  I don’t see an inconsistency with leaving the balance sheet plan in place 
while cutting the funds rate.  It’s the combination of the two that determines the level of 
accommodation. 
In view of the current condition of the economy and the economic outlook, I’d like our 
communications to preserve our policy optionality.  As we’ve seen, the data can move in 
unexpected ways, and our economy is quite resilient.  Our meetings are spaced out precisely so 
July 30-31, 2019
212 of 329


 
 
 
we have the necessary time to gather economic information, evaluate whether it’s changed our 
medium-run outlook and the risks around that outlook, and assess whether our policy is well 
calibrated. 
Now, it’s possible the downside risks will rise or be realized—or that we’ll conclude that 
our policy is not well calibrated, as Governor Clarida and others pointed out yesterday, right?  
And that would necessitate a decrease in the funds rate later this year.  But it’s also possible that 
the economy has more momentum than some think, that the strong income growth in the first 
quarter could lead to stronger-than-expected consumer spending, and that this, coupled with 
reduced uncertainty on trade policy or even static uncertainty on trade policy, could spur 
investment growth and lead to further strengthening in the economy, which would show through 
to market yields, too.  We should be prepared for either outcome, and our communications 
should support the Committee as it continues to evaluate the evolution of the economy and the 
outlook. 
I understood from Chair Powell’s comments yesterday that he’s trying to maintain some 
of that optionality with his press conference remarks.  And I noticed that he said that, as a part of 
his statement at the press conference, he’s going to say “In contemplating any further 
adjustments in the funds rate.”  But I don’t see that in this postmeeting statement, and I wonder if 
perhaps that language might be added to the statement accompanying this rate cut.  I don’t quite 
understand why we wouldn’t put that language in the postmeeting statement rather than putting it 
in the press conference statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  I might point out that late in the day yesterday, I added 
the word “any” inadvertently to the language you just mentioned.  And I know you correctly 
wrote it down, but I incorrectly said the word “any.”  That was not in there. 
July 30-31, 2019
213 of 329


 
 
 
MS. MESTER.  I see. 
CHAIR POWELL.  And we’ve had extensive discussions—about whether that language 
should go in the press conference statement or also in the meeting statement, and here’s where 
it’s come to rest.  But it’s a fair question. 
MS. MESTER.  Okay.  Thanks. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The economy has been doing well this year, 
bolstered by confident consumers and a strong job market.  Financial conditions are very 
accommodative, with borrowing rates low and the stock market at all-time highs.  Fiscal and 
trade policy uncertainty has diminished but remains. 
Nonetheless, business investment has weakened, reflecting trade and global forces, and 
inflation remains soft.  While the modal outlook is solid, the risks are still tilted to the downside.  
Taking into account the downside risks at a time when inflation is on the soft side supports the 
case for a 25 basis point cut in the target range for the federal funds rate, according to principles 
of risk management. 
The incoming data, though, have shown no indication that the expansion is at risk of 
ending.  The pace of job growth, while slower than last year’s strong pace, is still strong enough 
to further bolster the prime-age employment-to-population ratio.  And coincident indicators, such 
as initial claims for unemployment insurance, are at historical lows.  The latest 12-month data on 
inflation remain soft, but the three-month data provide some reassurance that we’re likely to see 
slow but steady movement toward our 2 percent inflation objective.  Some survey evidence 
suggests that the pall that has hung over the manufacturing sector this year may be lifting. 
July 30-31, 2019
214 of 329


 
 
 
So I would like to take some time to wait and see.  If the economy were to slow more 
than I’m currently expecting, if recession risks failed to abate, or if inflation failed to move 
toward target, I would be open to additional rate cuts.  However, the extended risk appetite in 
financial and credit markets and historically high leverage among risky corporate borrowers 
provide some reasons for caution.  Experience suggests that rising financial imbalances, rather 
than price inflation, have precipitated the past several downturns.  Financial market 
overoptimism is pro-cyclical.  Current asset valuations and leveraged lending are consistent with 
that pattern. 
We should be addressing these financial imbalances by activation of the countercyclical 
capital buffer, more rigorous use of stress tests, and active monitoring of leveraged lending.  
Instead, payouts are exceeding earnings for the third year in a row, and capital buffers are falling.  
Short of deploying macroprudential tools, a cautious approach is our best hope of keeping 
exuberance in check while moving us toward our price-stability goal. 
I support a rate cut at this meeting, but beyond this I would want to take some time to 
assess how the outlook is evolving, just as we’ve done with all of our policy actions throughout 
this expansion.  On the basis of the outlook and the balance of risks today, I don’t see the case 
for an additional reduction in the policy rate in September—although I’m open to it, should the 
data surprise me. 
I am concerned that the statement language will be seen as doubling down on 
expectations of a September cut, and, as a result, we will be pulled by market expectations rather 
than being guided by the data.  Today’s policy easing, which combines an expected cut in the 
federal funds rate with an unexpected early end to balance sheet runoff, provides the best 
July 30-31, 2019
215 of 329


 
 
 
opportunity to recalibrate the language in order to have a gentle realignment of market 
expectations and regain optionality. 
As Trevor’s presentation indicated yesterday, market expectations already place a 
65 percent probability on an additional rate cut in September.  We added the language “will act 
as appropriate” to the postmeeting statement in June to signal the near certainty of a rate cut in 
July.  I’m concerned that, by repeating that phrase today, we will lock in market expectations of 
a rate cut in September.  From what I’ve heard so far, signaling a rate cut in September doesn’t 
appear to reflect the views of the Chair or the Committee currently, which appear to be more 
dependent on the data. 
I’m not going to offer language today, because I recognize that the communication 
challenge is great.  But I would have liked to see us moving the language one notch backward 
toward our May language, perhaps by reintroducing the notion that the Committee is monitoring 
incoming information as it determines whether future adjustments may be appropriate.  That 
said, I am prepared to support alternative B, recognizing that this is a delicate and difficult time 
for communications.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’m quite conflicted with this decision.  I’ve 
heard the arguments for cutting rates, but I simply do not think the economic fundamentals 
warrant such a decision.  However, I think that we have boxed ourselves in as a Committee and 
this cut is inevitable.  Thus, I can very reluctantly support the 25 basis point cut in the target 
range for the federal funds rate described in alternative B.  But I don’t support the early end of 
balance sheet normalization. 
July 30-31, 2019
216 of 329


 
 
 
On the cut, in order for me to come to the view that I will support it, I must view the rate 
cut more as a recalibration of policy and not as the first step on a path to taking out more 
insurance via further cuts, as others have said.  On ending the balance sheet normalization earlier 
than we had previously announced, I believe it is unnecessary, will confuse markets, and will 
send signals that will make both the normalization of the balance sheet and the conduct of future 
monetary policy more difficult. 
So let me explain briefly both of these views.  While I share others’ concerns over the 
persistent undershooting of our inflation target and recent inconsistency of market-based 
expectations with that target, we do seem to be slowly making headway.  Some recent readings 
on inflation have come in a bit stronger, and the economy seems to be on relatively solid footing.  
Trade policy developments have yet to affect the U.S. economy materially, and economic 
fundamentals appear strong.  Additionally, the economies of our two major trading partners—
Canada and Mexico—are improving.  An indication that the current rate cut is the start of even 
more accommodation could very well be misinterpreted and sow unease among the public over 
the state of the economy.  That, in turn, will only serve to increase the likelihood that future rate 
cuts will be needed.  
On the balance sheet, a premature ending of the balance sheet runoff will only intensify 
that unwarranted signal.  The Committee made clear in our communications that we expected the 
balance sheet normalization would be largely mechanical, and that the federal funds rate would 
be our primary policy instrument.  The remaining runoff, as others have said, is inconsequential 
in size, so I see no reason to put balance sheet policy front and center.  Doing so could easily be 
interpreted as the Committee being more concerned about the economy than is warranted, given 
the improvement in the most recent data, or that we are contemplating a return to additional asset 
July 30-31, 2019
217 of 329


 
 
 
purchases.  Furthermore, emphasizing a change in balance sheet policy will make it more 
difficult to assure markets that when the balance sheet starts growing, along with reserves, later 
this year, that’s a natural step in normalization, not some part of a larger plan for more QE. 
Finally, I would like to highlight the conversation at our recent board of directors 
meeting.  They, like the Committee, are very divided over the necessity of adding 
accommodation.  Many at that meeting are confused.  They were confused as to why we were 
taking this action and expressed deep concern about Federal Reserve independence and political 
pressure.  While they did not believe, as a group, that we were in any way influenced by the 
current political climate, they hope—and, in some cases, ask—that we continue forcefully 
dispelling any perception that we are reacting to such processes and pressure.  
So, in conclusion, I cannot support alternative B as written.  While I do not believe 
economic fundamentals warrant any change in the policy rate at this time, I, like my board, am 
reluctantly willing to go along with a 25 basis point cut, in view of the strong signal we have 
given to the market already.  However, in light of the inclusion of the balance sheet paragraph, I 
must tilt to not supporting alt-B as written.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  You know, this is a very tough meeting.  Except 
for being in the midst of a full-fledged crisis, this is among the most difficult decisions, I think, 
the Committee ever faces. 
I think President Bullard framed this quite well.  We’re looking for the level of the 
federal funds rate that seems most appropriate for the economy.  Are we neutral, restrictive, or 
accommodative?  And it’s a lot easier when we kind of see—we want to be up here, and we’re 
here, so we can see the path, or things like that.  So I think this is very difficult.  I have great 
July 30-31, 2019
218 of 329


 
 
 
respect for everybody’s opinions that they’ve expressed.  I think somebody has to make a choice, 
and I think that’s the role of leadership in this. 
I will support alternative B and the associated balance sheet action today, although I 
prefer alt-A—its language and its 50 basis point cut.  Regarding alt-B, I have some reservations 
about how the statement describes our rationale for cutting rates.  Mainly, I’m concerned that 
we’re being too timid in the face of the continued underrun of inflation relative to our symmetric 
target and the downward shocks we have faced in recent years.  Those risks remain.  That is why 
I would give overshooting inflation a chance. 
Regarding growth, the incoming data on economic activity generally have been positive.  
Indeed, with a baseline projection for growth at or a bit above trend, there does not seem to be a 
strong case for a rate cut on the grounds of the baseline projection.  However, important 
uncertainties remain—namely, trade policy, slowing global growth, and Brexit—which I do 
believe support a move on a risk-management basis.  But, for me, the most straightforward and 
important reason to cut rates is persistently low inflation.  In the current setting, the risk is not 
doing too much—it’s being timid and doing too little.  
Now, I will note, I heard Governor Brainard’s comments on financial instability risks and 
their link to past economic risks and downturns that we’ve faced.  That gives me pause.  I am 
assuming that the state of our financial stability regulation is strong—strong enough to focus on 
our monetary policy dual-mandate responsibilities. 
For me, the language in alt-B doesn’t quite align with my views on where I think the 
inflation risks are.  The commentary that inflation has been “running below 2 percent” but is 
expected to rise toward target has been in our statement for a long time now without any 
substantial progress.  Furthermore, the reference to “muted inflation pressures” in paragraph 2 
July 30-31, 2019
219 of 329


 
 
 
almost sounds like an afterthought and is a much softer characterization than my view of the 
current policy challenge.  I prefer the language in alternative A that refers to “inflation running 
persistently below 2 percent.”  This language more explicitly expresses a rationale for lowering 
the policy rate as a proactive effort to increase inflation.  I think this language has a better chance 
of being effective. 
Indeed, there’s a strong argument for incorporating not only alt-A’s language on 
inflation, but also its 50 basis point rate cut.  Our repeated failure to meet our inflation goal puts 
our credibility over the symmetric inflation target at risk.  A 50 basis point action today that was 
tied closely to the inflation outlook would be a forceful communication of commitment to our 
symmetric inflation objective. 
In seeking to keep the expansion going, giving inflation overshooting a chance would 
help.  Like President Daly, I see little downside risk to aggressive action tied to inflation.  If 
inflation pressures are stronger than I currently think, a rate cut would simply help get us to our 
inflation objective a bit sooner.  There’s nothing wrong with that. 
I also worry that alt-B’s attempt to preserve optionality could negate the value of a rate 
cut today.  The discussion yesterday and today suggests to me a high tolerance by the Committee 
for a single rate cut, if it has to be done, and a lack of concern if inflation improvement stalls 
once again.  I worry this would promote a lot of confusing commentary about fine-tuning, regret, 
and other such issues.  With only 25 basis points today in alt-B, I think the “prepared to make 
further adjustments in the target range” language in alt-A would communicate an appropriately 
stronger tilt toward additional easing to address our inflation problem and support sustaining the 
recovery.  This language would be useful for emphasizing risk-management considerations. 
July 30-31, 2019
220 of 329


 
 
 
Nevertheless, I will support alternative B today in its current state.  If I thought our policy 
decision and near-term communications strategy conveyed too much complacency over our 
strategy for delivering symmetric 2 percent inflation, I’d have more concerns.  But today I 
support alternative B.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I believe the 
economic outlook is stabilizing, with real GDP growth around 2 percent for 2019, although I do 
think trade tensions persisting and global growth deceleration are real risks. 
With headline inflation running below our 2 percent target—I’d point out that the Dallas 
trimmed mean, though, is still running around 2 percent—I would emphasize that we expect 
inflationary forces to remain muted due primarily to structural forces rather than cyclical forces.  
As I’ve said before, I would again emphasize that I question how much these structural forces 
are susceptible to being addressed by monetary policy. 
Having said all of that, I do believe the yield curve is flashing a signal that the federal 
funds rate is out of alignment with market-determined rates.  This situation has persisted.  It’s 
gotten worse since May 1.  But it feels to me like it’s going to continue to persist.  With a clean 
sheet of paper, I would have said that the federal funds rate is 25 to 50 basis points too high 
relative to market-determined rates.  Or—said another way—I think it is 25 to 50 basis points too 
high relative to the strength and the potential of this economy in the aftermath of fiscal stimulus 
and with fiscal stimulus waning. 
At the Dallas Fed, we’ve been running a modified Taylor rule calculation in parallel for 
some time now.  And when I say “modified,” we use a lower natural rate of unemployment than 
the Board staff, and we’ve been using a modified intercept.  In running that calculation, we’ve 
July 30-31, 2019
221 of 329


 
 
 
come to the conclusion, as a reality check, that we, again, are about 25 to 50 basis points too high 
on the federal funds rate. 
I believe it would be prudent to make an adjustment to the policy rate so it is better 
aligned to market-determined rates.  I would emphasize that this is a modest, restrained, and 
limited tactical move, not a signaling of a fundamental change in strategy suggesting the 
beginning of a rate-cutting cycle, a fundamental shift in the FOMC’s framework, or a change in 
our reaction function.  It is not a shift away from a balanced approach to monetary policy where 
we’re willing to offset the undershoot in one objective with an overshoot in the other objective. 
In terms of communication, I would support making the adjustment today, but 
accompanied by a signal that we will be patient.  I know we’ve stopped using that word, but 
something along the lines of “We’ll be patient and continue to monitor incoming economic 
data.”  I think, as President Bullard said, I support a wait-and-see posture. 
I would also be open to the language that Governor Brainard threw out about 
“whether”—using that word.  I know the markets may be disappointed by that.  I hope they are.  
While I do believe a second move may, in fact, be needed down the road, I’m also very 
concerned about market probabilities pricing in three or four rate-cut moves.  And I think  our 
thinking and our communication have to take account of that concern.  I, for one, would want to 
see more evidence of weakness in the outlook, of the prospect of real GDP growth below 
potential growth, before embarking on more than a tactical adjustment in the federal funds rate. 
I mentioned this yesterday—and this is not for this meeting, as we’ve got enough on our 
plate, God knows, for this meeting—but I would still want to put on the table for the future 
whether we could wean off this language related to sustaining the expansion.  And let me explain 
again why.  There are limits—and I think it’s important that the market sees that there are 
July 30-31, 2019
222 of 329


 
 
 
limits—to how far we’re willing to create excesses and imbalances in order to extend the 
expansion.  My fear is, if excesses and imbalances build excessively, that, in fact, will make it 
harder for this and future Committees to achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustainable 
basis.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  As I look at the map, I’m reminded that Richmond is geographically 
closest to Cleveland, Atlanta, and Philadelphia.  So I believe I will be repeating what my 
colleagues at those three Banks said, which is that today’s move makes me uncomfortable.  And 
I would agree with those who would suggest that moving again in September feels quick. 
Over and over, I’ve had contacts ask me why we think we need a rate cut so urgently.  
My board pushed me hard on this, with questions that echoed President Rosengren’s words from 
the previous meeting and this meeting, which I might paraphrase as “With growth above trend, 
unemployment at 50-year lows, the market at all-time highs, corporate lending a bit “frothy,” and 
inflation close to target, why use your scarce ammunition now?”  And this case seems even 
stronger today than it was at our previous meeting. 
As we discuss this statement, I hear three possible rationales for moving now to cut the 
federal funds rate.  And, of course, they can be combined.  A cut could be insurance at a time of 
uncertainty.  For this rationale, I’m challenged by the data.  The economy’s growth, 
employment, and inflation seem to be headed in the right, not the wrong, direction.  Uncertainty 
seems, if anything, lower.  And it’s hard to see evidence that the current policy stance is 
constraining—even in the most direct transmission markets, like autos.  For sure, something bad 
could happen, either globally or politically, but that concern seems like a constant these days.  If 
we move now, under what circumstances wouldn’t we make a similar move in the future?  If the 
July 30-31, 2019
223 of 329


 
 
 
concern we have is business confidence, what makes us think firms’ investment posture will shift 
based on a modest change in what they already see as historically low rates?  Put differently, 
might it not be better insurance to save our scarce dry powder for when we truly need it? 
Alternatively, a cut might support our efforts to meet our symmetric inflation target.  And 
I can see the case here, given our multiyear underperformance.  I do wonder, though, if “the juice 
is worth the squeeze,” particularly after taking account of the strength of the recent data.  In view 
of what I said yesterday about the embedded nature of sectoral pricing dynamics, I’m concerned 
this won’t have a visible effect on inflation or inflation expectations in any nearby period.  If 
true, then what would be our next move—further rate cuts?  If so, it’s easy to imagine that logic 
leading us inexorably toward the lower bound.  But I might argue that Japan and Europe have 
been there for quite a while without stimulating the inflation in the way we aspire to.  Or, if 
we’re too successful and we overstimulate the economy, can we count on the economy being 
healthy enough to bear the rate increases necessary to control it? 
Of course, we can justify a cut by pointing to the markets.  Either they know something 
we don’t or not cutting will lead to a market reaction that will shake the economy.  Perhaps this 
happened in December.  I can’t deny the likelihood of a market rout if we don’t cut today.  But 
this, too, makes me uncomfortable, as I believe we’ve been the ones moving the markets as they 
overparse our statements rather than the data.  It’s not healthy for markets to be this overindexed 
on us.  We somehow need to find a way to send a message.  So if we do make this cut, then I 
support Governor Brainard, President Kaplan, and others who’ve said, “Let’s accompany it by 
finding a way to reset expectations.” 
Net, I guess my risk-management assessment is different.  The upside of today’s move is 
modest, unless there are data we aren’t seeing.  If the upside isn’t realized, its logic will hasten 
July 30-31, 2019
224 of 329


 
 
 
our path to the effective lower bound that we fear.  No move is costless, and this one spends 
some of our precious firepower, unmoors our decision rationale from its historical 
underpinnings, and potentially messages that we see hidden economic and/or inflation 
weaknesses.  It will tempt a market reaction that will engender even more dependence than 
today.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In March of this year, I lowered my 
estimates of appropriate policy, shifting to a flat policy rate path.  At that time, the outlook called 
for growth moderating to trend in the face of downside risk stemming from a weaker global 
outlook and heightened trade policy uncertainty.  Data from the first half of this year indicate 
that economic conditions have largely unfolded in line with my outlook.  Real GDP growth has 
moderated, as expected, with strong household spending but weaker-than-expected business 
investment.  In my view, the outlook has not fundamentally changed, and I continue to see our 
current policy settings as appropriate today, along the lines of alternative C. 
Although widely expected at this meeting, a 25 basis point reduction does not seem 
warranted when the economy is growing above trend, labor markets are healthy, and consumers 
remain optimistic and are spending.  I’m also skeptical that easing policy will be effective in 
moving inflation higher.  After years of accommodative policy, inflation has shown little interest 
in adhering to historical norms or Phillips curve theory, while trade and global developments 
over the past year appear to be exerting additional downward pressure.  It seems to me that 
today’s circumstances call for relying on a balanced approach, as referenced in our Statement on 
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.  Reacting to muted inflation pressures seems 
July 30-31, 2019
225 of 329


 
 
 
less compelling in the context of a strong labor market, with an unemployment rate that sits 
below most estimates of its longer-run level and an economy that continues to grow above trend. 
Although I do not support the action in alternative B today, I am prepared to adjust our 
policy settings in the months ahead should economic activity fundamentally shift the outlook for 
the economy.  With downside risk prominent and heightened market sensitivity to central bank 
communications, being data dependent seems particularly important now.  Doing so will provide 
the flexibility that the Committee needs as it seeks to set policy to achieve our dual mandate.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as currently written, and 
I appreciate the perspectives that President Bullard and President Evans provided on finding the 
appropriate level of the federal funds rate in the course of our policy normalization. 
It remains my baseline expectation that the domestic economy will perform well in 2019.  
The unemployment rate remains at its lowest level in decades, and various indicators point to the 
continued strength in labor demand and hiring activity.  The BEA reported that real GDP 
increased at a solid rate of 2.6 percent over the first half of the year, with much of that strength 
reflecting momentum in consumer spending growth, and financing conditions for both 
households and businesses appear favorable. 
But since our June meeting, the outlook for economic growth abroad has once again been 
downgraded, and uncertainties about trade negotiations and the step-down in global trade have 
persisted.  We’re already seeing signs that the concerns about global developments are beginning 
to weigh on activity in the business sector—most notably, earnings expectations for capital 
goods producers have moved down sharply, and measures of business sentiment remain lower.  
July 30-31, 2019
226 of 329


 
 
 
There appears to be some risk that business investment and manufacturing activity here in the 
United States may weaken more than in the staff’s baseline forecast. 
In addition, we’ve fallen short of our inflation target so far this year.  Although 2 percent 
does not seem to be an unreachable target should labor market conditions tighten to the point that 
they apply upward pressure on wages, we have yet to see much of this effect.  The inflation 
shortfall this year could be concerning when viewed against the backdrop of lower inflation 
expectations, as shown by the downtrend in median long-run inflation expectations in the 
Michigan survey.  The fact that we’ve not yet achieved our 2 percent inflation objective for an 
extended period, despite being well into an economic expansion, is also a relevant consideration 
at this point. 
In sum, given all of the information we currently have in hand, in my view, the balance of 
risks and available data support making a modest downward adjustment to our policy stance.  
My expectation is that this should be sufficient to bolster confidence and support the continued 
economic expansion, but I will continue to watch the incoming data closely, especially for signs 
that inflation is firming.  I will also monitor the economic data for signs that the uncertain global 
outlook threatens the positive outlook for economic performance here at home. 
Additional warning signs in either of these areas may lead me to change my assessment 
for the appropriate path of monetary policy.  I also agree with Governor Brainard and Presidents 
Barkin and Kaplan that we need to reset the expectations for future movements in the federal 
funds rate through our communications.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as written—not free of 
reservation, but I have many reservations about our imperfect world, yet life must go on. 
July 30-31, 2019
227 of 329


 
 
 
I see three potentially persuasive rationales for supporting a rate cut at this meeting, only 
one of which I find actually persuasive—and then only on the basis of certain reasonable but not 
inarguable assumptions.  The first rationale might be concerns over inflation and slipping 
inflation expectations.  Inflation pressures are certainly subdued, but that’s a good thing, and I 
don’t find the current shortfall in core PCE inflation to be that concerning.  As the transitory 
factors that depressed prices in the first quarter fade, I expect inflation to move back up toward 
2 percent on a year-over-year basis.  Measures of inflation are imprecise.  Measures of inflation 
expectations are difficult to interpret, especially as market-based measures seem overly 
influenced by movements in oil prices. 
Second, the rate cut could be justified by signs of economic slowing.  The rate reduction 
could reflect our data dependence.  The case here is certainly not clear cut.  The domestic data 
remain quite good—strong consumption growth and a continued robust labor market.  As 
mentioned yesterday, the global picture is more troubling, with more definitive signs of slowing 
growth, although I think it’s interesting that the staff’s estimate of the quantitative feedback of 
global growth developments to the United States since the June meeting actually reflects a slight 
positive for our growth prospects, reflecting increases in growth projections in Canada and 
Mexico and the great deal of trade that we do with those countries relative to the rest of the 
world.  Overall, while admitting that the outlook is unclear, all else being equal, I would not be 
inclined to cut rates today on the basis of the data alone, taking into account the full force of the 
Chair’s point that he made yesterday—that, in part, financial conditions are where they are today 
because people are expecting this cut. 
That brings me to the third potential rationale—heightened risks and the opportunity to 
take out an insurance cut.  So while along some dimensions—trade tensions and the debt 
July 30-31, 2019
228 of 329


 
 
 
ceiling—risks to the outlook appear to have diminished since June, I completely share the 
Chair’s assessment that he expressed yesterday that this decline in risks, especially with respect 
to China trade tensions, is deceptive.  I think that the public, markets, and perhaps this group 
have taken too much signal from the fact that people left Osaka without a shooting war having 
actually broken out in the South China Sea, and there is much less there than people have been 
expecting.  On top of that, we’re entering a volatile political season.  I find it highly unlikely that 
trade tensions will diminish much further—even from what I think is the more elevated level that 
they’re actually at rather than what people are currently perceiving—and, indeed, quite likely 
that tensions could escalate rapidly. 
So, given the assumption that trade tensions quite likely could escalate rapidly, I am 
comfortable with today’s rate cut, but I don’t, at this point, see the case for making further cuts 
later in the year.  Like others, I’d be quick to reassess that if the data were to deteriorate or risks 
were to increase meaningfully further—again, beyond what I’m already baking in to be 
comfortable with the cut today.  I think the market has gotten ahead of itself in terms of 
expecting future rate cuts.  Like many, I would like to maintain some optionality on our 
decisions later this year.  But in that regard, I’m very supportive of the Chair’s strategy that he 
described yesterday, which is not to try to move markets in one fell swoop to that conclusion, but 
to take the opportunity for the various communication events that will happen during the course 
of the intermeeting period to try to move the markets in that direction and to give us more 
optionality. 
Finally, on ending the balance sheet runoff two months early, this change seems fairly 
minor and inconsequential to me from both a financial and a policy perspective.  I supported 
halting our balance sheet reduction at the original September date, having concluded from the 
July 30-31, 2019
229 of 329


 
 
 
Sturm und Drang in December and the caterwauling over the couple of months that followed that 
the people stirring the pot over this issue were either cynical or ineducable [laughter], and that 
the key would be to hold the balance sheet steady for a long enough time to shrink it relative to 
GDP as we take steps to further decrease banks’ demand for reserves rather than potentially 
restart that frustrating and certainly fruitless education effort of six months ago.  I have no 
problem starting that process on August 1 rather than September 30.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative A at this meeting, 
but with a twist that, as I did last time, I would encourage us to add forward guidance that after 
we cut by 50 basis points we will commit to hold the federal funds rate or not raise it until we see 
core inflation return to our target in a sustainable manner. 
I was really struck by President George’s comment yesterday at the end of the meeting.  
This is about Trevor’s chart showing the SEP PCE inflation forecasts.  This is what a picture of a 
ceiling looks like.  Whether we meant to or not, we have taught the markets that our reaction 
function is that our 2 percent inflation target is a ceiling, and that, to me, is why inflation 
expectations are less than we would like them to be.  And now we need to teach the markets a 
different reaction function.  As, much to my surprise, folks on that end of the table, Presidents 
Mester, Bostic, and Rosengren—maybe I’m leaving some out—said today, I don’t think 25 basis 
points today is going to be enough to demonstrate that we, in fact, have a different reaction 
function that treats 2 percent as a symmetric inflation target.  That’s why I think my forward 
guidance is a step in that direction. 
Now, one thing I heard the Chair say, which I agree with, is, I don’t want to make a 
commitment that we will do whatever it takes to raise inflation to our 2 percent goal, because we 
July 30-31, 2019
230 of 329


 
 
 
may not, in fact, be able to achieve it.  But my forward guidance is not that strong a commitment.  
It’s simply saying we’re not going to raise rates until we succeed.  Number one, it doesn’t 
guarantee success.  Number two, it doesn’t prevent us from further reducing the target range for 
the federal funds rate or taking other actions.  It’s a stronger form of forward guidance than I 
think has been used historically, but it’s not the ultimate form of forward guidance and does not 
guarantee success. 
You know, my base case is not that we are Japan.  I think there are important differences 
between us and Japan, demographics being number one, but I do think we have to learn from 
Japan.  If we wanted a strategy to follow the Bank of Japan strategy, what would we do?  We’d 
cut 25 basis points now, we’d follow the data, we’d cut 25 basis points later in the year, and we 
would slowly walk to the effective lower bound.  And then once we get there, we would declare, 
“Okay, now it’s our decision to stay here”—you know, ending up in a ditch and pretending that 
it’s your choice to stay in the ditch.  That’s why I think it’s much better to err on the side of 
being accommodative and being aggressive to avoid hitting the lower bound in the first place 
rather than pretending that you’re going to stay there by choice.  So that’s why I support 
alternative A, which includes a 50 basis point cut, with the addition of this forward guidance. 
The last comment I’ll make—and I want to just go back to something that Charlie said 
yesterday about being precise on what the costs are to running the economy hot.  If we get to a 
hot economy, what are the costs?  One that we talked about is financial market imbalances.  Is it 
imbalances, or is it just repricing of financial assets?  That’s hard to know for sure.   
And then, both President Daly and President Mester—neither of you were putting a hard 
line in the sand, but both of you mentioned the notion of, if the economy is hot, some people may 
choose to take jobs as opposed to getting education.  I’ve got to tell you, that gives me great 
July 30-31, 2019
231 of 329


 
 
 
discomfort—that we would be in the business of telling people we’re going to not let the 
economy get hot because we want you to make different choices with your life.  I mean, if the 
economy is hot, and people have jobs, and they choose to take jobs, God bless them for making 
that choice.  That’s their choice to make.  And, again, I know neither of you were saying that—
that’s a strong view but that’s just my reaction to something that both of you mentioned. 
So that’s why I think it would be really great for all of us to be very precise on what we 
think the costs are if the economy gets hot and then have a really frank discussion:  Is it 
appropriate for us to respond to those potential costs?  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B.  As I 
indicated yesterday, slowing domestic growth, a weak and uncertain global outlook, and very 
muted inflation pressures all argue in favor of a somewhat more accommodative policy stance. 
Now, one may be tempted to put weight on the strength of household spending and 
financial conditions and bet on these being sustained even with an unchanged policy stance.  But, 
as has already been mentioned a number of times, these very favorable financial conditions and 
all that comes with them are a result of expectations of a more accommodative policy stance 
already.  Maintaining the current level of interest rates would lead to a tightening of financial 
conditions, with negative implications for the economy. 
This is not an argument that we have to follow the markets.  The argument is, we’ve got 
to do the right thing.  The markets are reading our communications—whether it’s our statements 
or other communications—and coming to a conclusion about where we’re going.  So I don’t see 
this as being boxed in or cornered by the markets.  It’s really, that alternative B is the right policy 
stance to best achieve our goals and manage the risks, as others have said. 
July 30-31, 2019
232 of 329


 
 
 
The low levels of inflation and inflation expectations have really sapped my confidence 
in a rapid return of inflation to our 2 percent goal.  And, like President Kashkari, we all should be 
looking at the SEP PCE inflation chart from Trevor’s briefing.  I’ve been on this Committee 
throughout these years.  These are my forecasts.  I’ve been pretty much close to the median 
forecaster throughout this period, and I have learned a lot from this experience, and Governor 
Clarida has highlighted important lessons numerous times, I think.  One is that u*, the natural 
rate of unemployment or what is a sustainable level of unemployment, is clearly a lot lower than 
we thought.  And r* is lower than we thought.  Changes in the inflation process, the weakness 
abroad, which is one of the factors that’s held down inflation—inflation has been held down by 
structural and other factors. 
There’s a lot of learning on the way.  But still, this pattern of consistently—and 
predictably, in a way—overpredicting inflation and being overly confident about the return of 
inflation to its goal, I think, should teach us, one, that the world has changed in important ways 
that should affect our decisions and, two, the importance of actually delivering, in a consistent, 
sustained way, on our symmetric 2 percent goal, given this past history. 
Additional accommodation in a timely fashion, I do think, does support moving inflation 
back to our 2 percent goal.  This is in the context of a strong economy.  I think this is an 
important point.  A lot of people think, well, do we just want inflation to be higher?  It’s part of 
wanting a strong economy—sustain the expansion to support our dual-mandate goals.  So I think 
all of the arguments for moving to a somewhat more accommodative policy are aligned.  We 
want to offset some negative influences on the economy.  We want to keep growth around or a 
little bit above trend.  We want unemployment to be roughly around 3.5 to 3.75 percent.  We want 
to see inflation moving up. 
July 30-31, 2019
233 of 329


 
 
 
So I think these all make sense.  Will they be game changers?  Like President Kashkari, I 
was struck by the strong call by a number of my colleagues in the map section for a 50 basis 
point cut.  But I don’t think that that is actually the right answer at this time, because, as many 
have said and as President Evans, I think, appropriately said, this is a difficult decision.  There 
are strong arguments on one side.  There are strong arguments on the other side.  That argues for 
perhaps some moderation in how we proceed at this point. 
I think that we have seen that inflation expectations responded positively to our 
communications over the past six weeks, showing that our actions and our communication do 
affect the public’s view of our commitment to our 2 percent symmetric goal.  Obviously, I am 
influenced pretty strongly by the experience of Japan, the euro area, and elsewhere, where 
inflation expectations have drifted lower, and that has long-run consequences for how much 
policy space we have to deal with future downturns. 
Now, looking further ahead, I continue to expect that a further rate cut may well be 
warranted this year.  However, with today’s action, we are well positioned to collect and observe 
more data and more information—in advance of making that decision.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks for a great discussion.  I would echo what 
President Evans said about really being able to see both sides of the case.  After hearing all of the 
arguments again, though, I do feel this is the right decision, to make a rate cut today.  I do feel 
that it’s actually very possible to communicate the rationale for it, and I think the rationale will 
be accepted in general—obviously though, not by everybody, that’s for sure. 
But I think the far more challenging issue in this press conference and this meeting 
concerns what we say about the future and how to communicate that in the statement and in the 
press conference statement.  So what I’m going to do is call a coffee break and ask people to 
July 30-31, 2019
234 of 329


 
 
 
have some coffee or maybe the decaf [laughter]—try the decaf—and come back in about 
15 minutes.   
I want to think in a small group about the communications.  I’m taking to heart some of 
the comments that people made about maybe gently creating more optionality without—I don’t 
think it’s going to be appropriate to call a hard stop and say “We’re done unless things get 
worse” or something like that, because I don’t think that’s where the Committee is, either.  But 
there may be more we can do, so I’m going to do that now. 
So we’ll be back, why don’t we say, at 20 of 11:00.  That’s 20 minutes from now.  Thank 
you. 
 [Coffee break] 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  The coffee break’s over.  My thought is that the statement 
here should really do the work and express the consensus of the Committee and the views of 
people around the table and not leave a lot of work to be done in the press conference statement.  
So we’ve been considering not making any change or making one particular change to paragraph 
2, which I’ll ask Trevor to read out.  And, again, the idea is to create optionality and give me a 
basis for discussing data dependence in answer to the question on how we will determine the 
future path of policy that will inevitably be asked during the press conference. 
MR. REEVE.  Okay.  What we have on the table is the augmentation of the last sentence 
of paragraph 2 of alternative B.  It would state “As the Committee contemplates potential future 
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the 
implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to 
sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent 
objective.”  So that sentence remains unchanged after the “continue to monitor.”  And, again, the 
July 30-31, 2019
235 of 329


 
 
 
beginning is “As the Committee contemplates potential future adjustments to the target range for 
the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor . . .” 
CHAIR POWELL.  I think you need to know what I would plan to say when people ask 
me what the added phrase means.  And what I’ll say is, “Well, as I explained, here are the 
reasons why we made the adjustment in our policy stance, and those same factors will be the 
things that the Committee is going to be looking at over time.”  Or—I won’t say “over time,” but 
“the things it’ll be looking at” and talk about the factors one by one.  So the sense of it clearly is, 
we’re going to be looking at these things, which makes it pretty obvious that we haven’t decided 
to move in September.  But it also doesn’t say that we’re not going to be looking at moving, or 
that we’ve gone to completely neutral and things have to get worse for us to move, or anything 
like that.  I throw that open for discussion—Loretta. 
MS. MESTER.  Okay.  To my ears, because you’re saying “potential future 
adjustments”— 
CHAIR POWELL.  “Contemplates potential future adjustments.” 
MS. MESTER.  Yes.  The addition of that language seems to suggest more of a chance 
you’re going to be cutting, not less. 
MR. EVANS.  Yes, I thought so, too. 
MR. QUARLES.  I would agree with that, not having reflected on it.  But then, most 
people who hear it won’t have reflected on it, either. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Instead of “adjustments,” you could use the word “path,” and that 
doesn’t—the “adjustments” has a connotation of “down.”  The “path” is a little bit less 
directional—something like that might not give a direction, necessarily. 
July 30-31, 2019
236 of 329


 
 
 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  So, “contemplates the future path of the target range for the 
federal funds rate.”  
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes. 
MR. HARKER.  That’s better.  It is better. 
CHAIR POWELL.  “Adjustments to the path”? 
MR. HARKER.  No. 
MS. DALY.  No, “contemplates the future path.” 
MR. HARKER.  Yes.   
MR. EVANS.  I’m fine with that.  I was of the opinion that President Mester and 
Governor Quarles were—the comment about how “adjustments,” if anything, leans a little bit 
more toward a future cut or something like that.  But I don’t have a problem— 
MR. QUARLES.  That’s the future path.  I would think that’s perfect, but I could 
probably belong on that end of the table.  [Laughter] 
MS. MESTER.  Come on down.  [Laughter] 
MR. KASHKARI.  Trevor, can you read it again? 
MR. REEVE.  Which version?  The “path” version or the other one? 
MR. KASHKARI.  Either one. 
MR. REEVE.  The original suggestion:  “As the Committee contemplates potential future 
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the 
implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate.” 
MR. BARKIN.  What’s the alternative? 
MR. REEVE.  The other version:  “As the Committee contemplates the future path for 
the federal funds rate . . .” 
July 30-31, 2019
237 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  I mean, “potential future adjustments” is kind of neutral, too, isn’t it? 
MR. BARKIN.  No, no. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I mean, everything hinges, arguably, on the words and how the word 
“potential” is taken, right?  Because I think, in the interpretation that we had discussed, it’s not a 
foregone conclusion. 
CHAIR POWELL.  “Potential changes to the future path of the federal funds rate”?  
MR. BOSTIC.  “Contemplates the future path”—I think the concern is, the focus on 
adjustments suggests that our bias is toward action and doing something.  By taking the action 
out of it and just saying, “There’s a path, we’re going to think about what that is, and then, once 
we figure out what that path should look like, we might act”—it’s a little more distant from the 
action space. 
CHAIR POWELL.  But that goes further than I’m looking to go.  Mary. 
MS. DALY.  Oh, okay.  The way I heard it, with “adjustments,” is that, given that we 
were doing a rate cut today, “further adjustments”—people will baseline it off the cut and just 
naturally assume that the adjustment can only go one way.  I think it’s generally neutral if you 
don’t move the rate, but if you move the rate and then say “adjustments,” it has a carry-on effect, 
potentially.  So I like the original language better. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I would stick with the original language also.  I’m fearful of making 
people think we’re actively considering future— 
MR. QUARLES.  Future adjustments. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I don’t think they should come away thinking we’re actively planning to 
cut rates further—we’re basically going to monitor data first.  Then we’re going to figure out, as 
this period goes on, whether there’s any reason to move.  But I like the current language better. 
July 30-31, 2019
238 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  So, let me say, do people broadly, then, think that the current 
statement language creates a lot of optionality for us? 
MR. KAPLAN.  No. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Then am I supposed to go do it in the press conference?  I mean, it— 
MR. KAPLAN.  It depends on how you’ll answer the question.  The question will be 
“The market has priced in three or four rate cuts over the next X periods.  Does the market have 
it wrong, or what’s your comment on market probabilities for this many rate cuts?”  They’re 
going to ask that.   
MR. QUARLES.  They will ask whatever this says. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes, but that’s on me.  That’s not the Committee.  That’s on me in 
the press conference.  I think alternative B as written is roughly a neutral statement.  Maybe—it’s 
hard to say, actually, but it’s roughly a neutral statement.  And then, if the Committee wants to 
adjust expectations toward more optionality, then let the Committee do that.  I don’t think it’s 
good communication to issue what will be seen as a dovish statement and then have me going 
back into the press conference and pull it back.  I think my communications at the press 
conference, which will convey optionality about September, should be very consistent with 
what’s in the statement, and I’m worried that alternative B as written does nothing to create more 
optionality regarding September.  So I’m trying to address your concerns here. 
MR. BARKIN.  Jay, I’m sure you don’t need line editing, but another idea would be to 
remove the “uncertainties” clause.  I mean, you are hanging this on the global developments and 
the muted inflation pressures, I think, more than the uncertainties.  And if you just remove the 
“but uncertainties about this outlook remain,” arguably, that makes it less forward leaning on 
July 30-31, 2019
239 of 329


 
 
 
uncertainties.  It doesn’t change the “forward leaning” on inflation or global growth.  I don’t 
know if that helps. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Can I— 
CHAIR POWELL.  Go ahead.  Yes, jump in. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Okay.  I think that removing “uncertainties” turns the dial a 
notch.  But the problem is, uncertainties are a key part of the narrative from the previous meeting 
from the risk management perspective that a number of people highlighted.  So the problem with 
the statement without “uncertainties” is that the whole risk-management component is lost, and 
that creates the question:  “Well, does that mean there are no uncertainties anymore?”  That’s not 
a part of it.  So I think— 
MR. BARKIN.  And you don’t think you could point to global developments?  That 
may— 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Well, that was the idea at that point when we were doing 
that, but— 
MS. MESTER.  Well, if it’s part of the rationale, maybe the uncertainties belong in your 
list of things, which are global developments, muted inflation pressures, and uncertainties. 
CHAIR POWELL.  “Global developments” is kind of code for “uncertainties.” 
MS. MESTER.  Yes—well, it’s code, but if you moved up “uncertainties” into your list 
of things, it’s part of your rationale for doing something today.  And then you could delete it later 
in the statement, because that phrase, “but uncertainties,” was the trigger of saying at the 
previous meeting that we’re going to do something at this meeting.  And then it was, basically, 
intermeeting communication reinforced that view.  So you could say “global developments for 
the economic outlook, the uncertainties surrounding that outlook, as well as muted inflation 
July 30-31, 2019
240 of 329


 
 
 
pressures” and put in “uncertainties” there because it is part of your rationale, because you’re 
thinking of this as an insurance cut. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’m losing the thread here.  How does that help create optionality? 
MS. MESTER.  Well, it takes out the “but uncertainties about this outlook remain,” 
because that clause was the thing that triggered—right?—in the minds of the public that we were 
going to be setting up a cut at this meeting. 
CHAIR POWELL.  If you say “in light of uncertainties,” you’re kind of promoting them, 
too, rather than having them just “remain,” you know?  I’m not sure there’s a—am I missing the 
point here? 
MR. BARKIN.  One is past, and one is future.  So when you say “in light of global 
developments, uncertainties, and muted inflation,” that’s why we made this particular decision.  
When you have that thought at the back, it’s almost pointed at the future.  I take John’s point—
that was very right—which is, maybe you want to point at that. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Which is what?  Yes.  
MR. EVANS.  Can I offer a different— 
CHAIR POWELL.  Charlie. 
MR. EVANS.  Let me take one crack at this, which is, to create optionality, you kind of 
want to turn the clock back a couple of meetings, before we started talking about this.  And the 
language that you have, “the Committee will continue to monitor”—if you could find a clause, 
and I don’t have it, but something like “As the Committee has done since last spring, the 
Committee will continue to monitor.”  If there was some kind of phrase that lets you refer to a 
couple of meetings ago, where the environment was before you were doing this, that might— 
CHAIR POWELL.  We can say “as always.” 
July 30-31, 2019
241 of 329


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  As always. 
CHAIR POWELL.  But then you have to explain what that means.  No one knows what 
that means, and that means I get to fill it up with meaning—hawkish meaning.  So let’s have the 
Committee say what it means.  I mean, maybe that’s the right answer—sort of a de minimis 
answer.  Rob. 
MR. KAPLAN.  You’re not going to like this suggestion—or maybe not you, but people 
around the table—but let me make it anyhow [laughter]:  “The Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook.”  And I would love 
to say, instead of “will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion,” “as it seeks to achieve its 
dual mandate of . . .”  
CHAIR POWELL.  All of the market commentary we have suggests that that would be 
the bomb.  That would be taking it too far. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Too far.  Okay. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes.  Right.  Do it all in one sentence. 
MR. KAPLAN.  That’s fine.  I got it. 
MR. HARKER.  To pile on to something you’re probably not going to like [laughter]— 
CHAIR POWELL.  Please. 
MR. HARKER.  —because we don’t like touching paragraph 3.  One way of creating a 
little bit of optionality, in my mind, is to just change the first sentence in paragraph 3:  “In 
determining the timing and size of any further adjustments to the federal funds rate . . .” 
CHAIR POWELL.  See, this paragraph talks in a way that’s completely—this is just our 
objective function. 
MR. HARKER.  Well, I know.  I understand.  That’s why it won’t work. 
July 30-31, 2019
242 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  We’re not pulling a sign of our policy outlook into paragraph 3.  I 
mean, you’ve got to signal the policy outlook in the second paragraph. 
MR. BULLARD.  Is your feeling that you don’t have enough optionality to move 
again—that the current language is too restrictive? 
CHAIR POWELL.  No.  My feeling is, you have a market that sees a two-thirds 
probability that we’re going to move in September. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 
CHAIR POWELL.  This statement does nothing to pull that back, in my opinion—or 
risks doing nothing.  Let me finish.  So I go into the press conference, and I should be delivering 
the same message that is broadly consistent with the statement.  I think that takes the probability 
of a cut in September to close to 100 percent, probably, given the fact that we didn’t cut by 50 
basis points this meeting.  All of the people who expected 50 basis points, you can add that 
probability on top of September now so I think you get close to 100 percent, and then we have a 
full intermeeting period to try to create optionality.  I mean, no one has any certainty about how 
this works, but that would be my guess.  So I’m trying to create optionality in the direction of 
being able to take some time, as you suggested, to wait and see.  
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 
CHAIR POWELL.  The idea would be, over coming meetings—or the idea that it doesn’t 
have to be September.  You know, we’ve got the whole rest of the year.  There are three 
meetings left in the year.   
MR. BULLARD.  Okay. 
CHAIR POWELL.  And we need a technology for stretching out that review period over 
that longer period of time—rather than 100 percent probability of another rate hike in September. 
July 30-31, 2019
243 of 329


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  Could you say that? 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 
MS. DALY.  “Over coming meetings”?  
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 
MS. DALY.  I mean, I know you can’t say “date based.”  Okay.  Too date based? 
MR. BULLARD.  You can say “future adjustments.” 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Also, “meetings.”  
MR. BARKIN.  “Over time.”  What if you just added the words “over time”—that we’ll 
“continue to monitor, over time, the implications of incoming information”? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  And knock September off completely?  That sends the 
September probability to zero. 
MR. QUARLES.  That knocks September completely off. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Yes. 
MR. QUARLES.  You want to do that in one move? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  You want to send September to zero? 
CHAIR POWELL.  Go ahead, Loretta. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes.  I hate to get involved in this, because usually last-minute changes 
are not good, but instead of “this action supports the Committee’s,” could you say “with this 
action, the Committee continues to view,” which is basically—is that too far on the one side? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  It’s one and done. 
MS. MESTER.  Is it? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  It’s close, but I think that might—  
MS. MESTER.  But not if you keep the “continues” and “uncertainties”—maybe not. 
July 30-31, 2019
244 of 329


 
 
 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Maybe “uncertainties” might balance that.  So the 
statement— 
MR. BULLARD.  I like something like “over time” or “over coming meetings.”  That’s 
what I kind of like, if that’s what you want to do—if you want to spread it out so that we don’t 
put 100 percent probability of a cut in September, which, I think, as I understand it, is the goal. 
CHAIR POWELL.  We had many drafts go around with “with this action,” and the issue 
is having it be read as “with this action,” is that it is one and done.  And I know that’s what you 
want, right?  But— 
MS. MESTER.  No, no, no.  I wouldn’t—  
CHAIR POWELL.  That’s not what I’m trying to achieve. 
MS. MESTER.  No, I would never offer language that was only consistent with my— 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  I thought you were nodding to that. 
MS. MESTER.  No.  I’m trying to work through what you want. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes, yes.  So maybe that’s worth— 
MR. CLARIDA.  It just occurs to me as I hear this that one way to move some 
optionality to September is to say, in the last sentence, “The Committee will take time as it 
closely monitors the implications of incoming information.”  Then you don’t get into “over 
coming meetings.” You just say we’ll “take time.” 
CHAIR POWELL.  That takes September off the table, right? 
MR. QUARLES.  I would think so. 
MR. CLARIDA.  It reduces the probability—yes. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  I actually brought up “with this action” a little while ago 
because I think it does have—when we first thought about “with this action,” it didn’t have the 
July 30-31, 2019
245 of 329


 
 
 
“uncertainties,” and it sounded very much like it’s closing off future action.  I would write it this 
way: “With this action, the Committee views sustained expansion of economic activity, strong 
labor market conditions, and inflation,”—you know, the symmetric goal—“as the most likely 
outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain.” 
MS. MESTER.  That seems balanced. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  It gets the balance there with the “uncertainties.”  I think a 
lot of these efforts to use time or temporal words really are going to be read by markets—but, 
Lorie, correct me if I’m wrong—as a strong signal about one meeting or another meeting.  If you 
say “over time” or “over meetings,” it’s hard.  You’re kind of going into date-based language. 
MS. LOGAN.  Yes.  And I think the suggestion you just recommended balances the two, 
because it keeps the “uncertainties” but then provides that clarity of this meeting.  So I think 
that’s a nice balance from the market’s perspective and in light of what we heard. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Could we just put the “uncertainties” part as attached to the next sentence 
so that the uncertainties are linked to our monitoring?  So, “With this action, the Committee 
views . . . as the most likely outcomes.  But uncertainties remain, so the Committee will continue 
to monitor.”  I agree with some of the things that were said earlier—that “but the uncertainties 
remain” being tied— 
CHAIR POWELL.  See, that reads like we are one and done, but we’re going to monitor 
these uncertainties—to me.  I wanted “uncertainties” to be part of the “one and done” sentence.  I 
want it to be— 
MR. QUARLES.  Yes. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I do. 
MR. BOSTIC.  I don’t see it as saying that. 
July 30-31, 2019
246 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  No?  I mean, “uncertainties” is in the same sentence with this—you 
know.  If you move “uncertainties” to the next sentence, it seems to me you’re saying, “We’re 
done here, but we’re going to be monitoring,” as opposed to—and maybe I’m being—Thomas, 
just jump in. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Can I offer one suggestion to the final sentence that takes “act” away 
but not “appropriate”?  So it would read “The Committee will continue to monitor the 
implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and the appropriate path for 
policy to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 
2 percent objective.” 
MR. KAPLAN.  I like that change, too. 
MR. LAUBACH.  So the key thing would be to say “implications of incoming 
information for the economic outlook and the appropriate path for policy.” 
CHAIR POWELL.  You’re losing “act as appropriate.”  Lorie, what do you think?  John? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think it’s keeping a version of the “as appropriate.”  The three things that 
we heard from everyone were some version of “uncertainties,” some version of “closely 
monitor,” and some version of “as appropriate.”  So it still maintains an element of those. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Could you say it again?  I couldn’t— 
MR. LAUBACH.  Okay.  “The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of 
incoming information for the economic outlook and the appropriate path for policy to sustain the 
expansion.” 
MR. HARKER.  “With the monitoring the appropriate path”? 
MR. LAUBACH.  “To monitor the implications of incoming information for the 
economic outlook and the appropriate path.” 
July 30-31, 2019
247 of 329


 
 
 
MR. QUARLES.  “To sustain the expansion.”  So you got that in there. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Did we move off of “with this action”? 
MR. KAPLAN.  No. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I mean, my own—listening to this, I would keep that “with this action,” 
keep the “uncertainties,” and then take Thomas’s change to both. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I mean, the “act as appropriate,” I think, just sounds a little—that’s the 
forward-leaning piece, right? 
MR. KAPLAN.  I agree. 
MR. LAUBACH.  That’s sitting a little bit—I mean, it feels to me like it’s very close to 
what you try to accomplish by moving from “closely monitor” to “continue to monitor”—
namely, being a little bit less on the edge of the seat. 
MS. BRAINARD.  I like Thomas’s suggestion. 
MS. GEORGE.  I do, too. 
MR. HARKER.  Yes, it’s good.  I agree. 
CHAIR POWELL.  John?  But, I mean, the question I have is, does it go too far?  I mean, 
we were trying to do this by changing other stuff and leaving the “holy language” intact.  If you 
start messing with the holy language, that’s a different thing. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  The question you’ll be asked is, “Why did you change that?  
Is that telling us something?” 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes.  Why would you change that? 
MR. LAUBACH.  “Continue to monitor the implications for” this and that, to me, sounds 
like this is a description of what you’re going to do in coming months.  Namely, you’re going to 
July 30-31, 2019
248 of 329


 
 
 
look at the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and for the 
appropriate path of policy.  So, I mean, I do believe that it sends the signal of, the urgency for 
action has diminished, given the action that you’ve taken today. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes, I think it does.  I definitely think it does. 
MR. LAUBACH.  The urgency for further action has diminished, given the action that 
you’ve taken today. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’m concerned it may send it too well. 
MS. DALY.  Can I ask—I don’t think you like this, but I wanted to know why.  There 
was an original suggestion, or something that came second, that, instead of saying “the 
Committee will continue,” it was “in deciding the future path of policy, the Committee will 
continue.”  And that seems a little less problematic than the language that Thomas just 
suggested, in terms of going too far, but I didn’t know why you didn’t like it.  I didn’t know what 
discomfort it was going to cause you in the press conference. 
CHAIR POWELL.  But that was part of that tag-on clause before this sentence, right? 
MS. DALY.  No, I thought it was by itself.  It was just the only change. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Where are we going to put it? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  At the beginning.  
MS. DALY.  Instead of “further adjustments,” we were talking about—I forget what— 
MR. BULLARD.  “Future policy path.” 
MR. WILLIAMS.  “Potential future path.” 
MS. DALY.  Yes, “future policy path.” 
MR. QUARLES.  “Policy.” 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  “Contemplating the future path for policy.” 
July 30-31, 2019
249 of 329


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  So, take the original proposal— 
MR. LAUBACH.  “As the Committee contemplates the future path.”   
MR. QUARLES.  Instead of “adjustments.” 
MS. DALY.  Instead of “further adjustments.” 
MR. BULLARD.  Instead of “adjustments.” 
MS. DALY.  So you came out and said—Trevor, can you reread the first suggestion, I 
think? 
CHAIR POWELL.  Is this in lieu of the other five ideas? 
MS. DALY.  Yes.  This is instead of the other five ideas.  And I just wanted to go back to 
why—you didn’t like it originally, but you might like it better now with the other—[Laughter] 
MS. DALY.  So, Trevor, can you please read the one you guys came out with? 
MR. REEVE.  I’ll read the two versions with the “contemplates” formulation. 
MS. DALY.  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR. REEVE.  “As the Committee contemplates potential future adjustments to the target 
range for the federal funds rate.”  That’s the first one.  The second is “As the Committee 
contemplates the future path for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor.” 
MS. DALY.  That was the one I asked—  
CHAIR POWELL.  And that’s it.  Everything else stays the same. 
MS. DALY.  And that’s it. 
MR. QUARLES.  Everything else is the same. 
MR. EVANS.  What was that last one? 
MR. BULLARD.  It’d be very close to what the original proposal was. 
MR. EVANS.  Sorry, the last one is what we’re talking about?  
July 30-31, 2019
250 of 329


 
 
 
MR. REEVE.  It doesn’t have “adjustments”—yes. 
MR. EVANS.  Could you say it again? 
MS. DALY.  Can you reread the last one? 
MR. REEVE.  “As the Committee contemplates the future path for the federal funds 
rate.” 
CHAIR POWELL.  Gives me what I need. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  And then it has “act as appropriate” later or “appropriate”— 
MR. QUARLES.  Everything else—“act as appropriate.” 
MS. DALY.  Everything else is the same. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  And I would leave everything else. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I think that works. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Yes. 
MS. DALY.  I added value.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR POWELL.  Damn, Mary.  [Laughter] 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  “Future path for the target range”? 
MR. BOSTIC.  “Future path for the target range”? 
MR. LAUBACH.  Yes—“The future path for the target range of the federal funds rate.” 
MR. CLARIDA.  That does it. 
CHAIR POWELL.  All right.  Read it.  Read the whole thing one more time—that 
sentence.   
MR. EVANS.  The whole sentence, please. 
MR. REEVE.  Okay.  “As the Committee contemplates the future path for the target 
range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming 
July 30-31, 2019
251 of 329


 
 
 
information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a 
strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective.” 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  How many ways— 
CHAIR POWELL.  So—great.  And we think that is a basis for creating optionality? 
MR. BOSTIC.  It’s better. 
MR. HARKER.  It’s better. 
CHAIR POWELL.  All right.  Are we good, then? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  No other changes. 
CHAIR POWELL.  All right.  Let’s move, then.  Let me now ask Jim to make clear what 
the FOMC will vote on. 
MR. QUARLES.  Good luck.  [Laughter] 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you.   
CHAIR POWELL.  Jim.   
MR. CLOUSE.  The vote will be on the monetary policy statement as it used to appear on 
page 4 of Trevor’s briefing materials but with the amendments we’ve just discussed to the last 
sentence of paragraph 2.  The vote will also encompass the directive to the Desk as it appears in 
the implementation note shown on pages 8 and 9 of Trevor’s briefing materials. 
Chair Powell 
 
 
Yes 
Vice Chair Williams 
 
Yes 
Governor Bowman  
 
Yes 
Governor Brainard  
 
Yes 
President Bullard  
 
Yes 
Governor Clarida  
 
Yes 
President Evans 
 
 
Yes 
President George  
 
No 
President Rosengren 
 
No 
Governor Quarles  
 
Yes 
 
July 30-31, 2019
252 of 329


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Now we have two sets of related matters under the Board’s 
jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  May I have a motion 
from a Board member to take the proposed action with respect to the interest rates on reserves as 
set forth in the first paragraph associated with policy alternative B on the second-to-last page of 
Trevor’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Now may I have a motion from a 
Board member to take the proposed action with respect to the primary credit rate and the rates 
for secondary and seasonal credit as set forth in the second paragraph associated with policy 
alternative B on the second-to-last page of Trevor’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  At this point, I’ll call on Lorie to give a brief 
update to the Committee on the Desk’s operational plan for reinvestments under the new 
directive and the associated Desk statement.  Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.9  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll be referring to the handout on the Desk 
statement regarding reinvestments.  In light of the Committee’s decision to conclude the 
reduction in the SOMA portfolio, I’ll briefly describe plans for implementing the new directive 
and communicating the operational details to the public. 
 
9 The materials used by Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 9). 
July 30-31, 2019
253 of 329


 
 
 
In accordance with the directive, all principal payments received from Treasury 
securities, agency debt, and agency MBS will be reinvested starting August 1.  Specifically, the 
Desk will begin reinvesting all monthly principal payments from Treasury securities held in the 
SOMA portfolio through rollovers at Treasury auctions.  This will require only modest 
adjustments to the existing rollover process to reinvest fully coupon securities.  In addition, after 
the SOMA acquires Treasury bills through secondary-market purchases, they will also be rolled 
over at auction when they mature. 
The Desk will also begin reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and MBS 
securities up to $20 billion per month in Treasury securities in a manner that roughly matches the 
maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding.  The Desk plans to purchase these 
Treasury securities in the secondary market across 11 sectors of different maturities and security 
types approximately in proportion to the 12-month average of the amount outstanding in each 
sector relative to the total amount outstanding across sectors as measured as of the end of July. 
To execute these purchases, the Desk plans to conduct about 11 operations per month, 
one for each sector, and will generally include securities across the full maturity range of that 
sector.  Reflecting the timing of when the Desk receives information on the expected amount of 
agency MBS principal payments for the month, purchases will be scheduled on a mid-month to 
mid-month basis, along lines similar to how we conduct MBS reinvestment purchases today.  For 
operational reasons, there may be very slight deviations in the monthly purchase amounts.  These 
will not be carried over to future months.  However, we will continue to keep the Committee 
informed of these small amounts through the Desk briefing in the appendix. 
July 30-31, 2019
254 of 329


 
 
 
Finally, as directed, the Desk will continue to reinvest agency debt and agency MBS 
principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month into agency MBS.  And for this, no 
operational changes are needed. 
In terms of communications, recall that the Desk released a statement and frequently 
asked questions after the May FOMC meeting regarding its reinvestment plans.  Given the 
Committee’s decision to bring forward the timing of these purchases to August, the Desk will 
release a new statement, a draft of which is in your handout.  It has been updated to reflect the 
new directive and provides information on the operational approach to reinvestments, and we 
plan to release this statement along with the updates to relevant frequently asked questions this 
afternoon following the release of the FOMC statement. 
Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d be happy to take any questions. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Questions for Lorie?  [No response]  Seeing none, I thank you.   
Our final agenda item is to confirm that the next meeting will be Tuesday to Wednesday, 
September 17 to 18.  That concludes the meeting.  As always, a buffet lunch will be served next 
door.  Thanks very much, everybody. 
END OF MEETING 
 
July 30-31, 2019
255 of 329
