SOURCE: FOMC20200610meeting.pdf
DATE: 20200610
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
June 9–10, 2020 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held 
by videoconference on Tuesday, June 9, 2020, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, 
June 10, 2020, at 9:00 a.m. 
PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chair 
John C. Williams, Vice Chair 
Michelle W. Bowman 
Lael Brainard 
Richard H. Clarida 
Patrick Harker 
Robert S. Kaplan 
Neel Kashkari 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
Stacey Tevlin, Economist 
Beth Anne Wilson, Economist 
Shaghil Ahmed, Marc Giannoni, Trevor A. Reeve, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, 
Associate Economists 
Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Matthew J. Eichner,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, 
Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, 
Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations. 
June 9–10, 2020
1 of 270


 
 
 
 
 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors 
 
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
 
Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
 
William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, Chiara Scotti, and 
Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
 
Brian M. Doyle,2 Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors 
 
 
Edward Nelson3 and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
 
Sally Davies, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; 
David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Andrew Figura, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul A. Smith, Deputy 
Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. 
Walker,1 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment 
Systems, Board of Governors; Paul R. Wood,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors 
 
 
Brian J. Bonis, Etienne Gagnon, and Zeynep Senyuz, Assistant Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
 
Matthias Paustian,3 Assistant Director and Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 
of Governors 
 
 
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Dana L. 
Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Dario Caldara,5 
Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 
 
 
 
2 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook, and all of Wednesday’s session. 
3 Attended through the discussion of forward guidance, asset purchases, and yield caps or targets. 
4 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 
5 Attended from the discussion of economic developments and the outlook through the end of Tuesday’s session. 
June 9–10, 2020
2 of 270


 
 
 
Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Canlin Li,3 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of International Finance, 
Board of Governors 
 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
 
Hess T. Chung,3 Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
 
Michele Cavallo, Bernd Schlusche,3 and Mary Tian, Principal Economists, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
 
Sriya Anbil,3 Erin E. Ferris, and Fabian Winkler, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors; David S. Miller,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors; Gaston Navarro, Senior Economist, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 
 
 
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 
 
 
James Hebden3 and James M. Trevino,3 Senior Technology Analysts, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
 
Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
 
 
David Altig, Joseph W. Gruber, Anna Paulson, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, 
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, Chicago, New 
York, and St. Louis, respectively 
 
 
Edward S. Knotek II, Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache,1 Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,1 
Robert G. Valletta, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,1 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Cleveland, New York, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and New York, respectively 
 
 
Roc Armenter, Matthew D. Raskin,1 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, New York, and New York, respectively 
 
 
Robert Lerman,1 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 
 
Daniel Cooper and John A. Weinberg, Senior Economists and Policy Advisors, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston and Richmond, respectively 
 
 
June 9–10, 2020
3 of 270


 
 
 
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
June 9–10, 2020 
 
June 9 Session 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  This meeting, as usual, will be a joint 
meeting of the FOMC and the Board.  I need a motion from a Board member to close the 
meeting. 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  Before we move to our formal agenda, I’d like to 
review some logistics.  We again have a parallel Skype session that participants and others can 
use to indicate when they have a question.  But please use that Skype session only for indicating 
your desire to speak.  If you make comments in there and that sort of thing, they’ll need to 
become part of the record. 
Following each staff briefing, if you’d like to ask a question or a two-hander, please 
indicate that in the Skype session, which I’ll be monitoring.  I’ll also call for any further 
questions at the end of each Q&A session in case anyone is having difficulty with Skype.  A link 
to a single file, consisting of all presentation materials, was distributed yesterday evening.  You 
can open the file at that link and follow along during the briefings. 
Next, the video element of this meeting involves some new technology—thanks to Matt 
and everyone who worked so hard to get it up and running.  We hope that it works well, but if 
there are unexpected problems, we may need to revert to an all-audio call, as in April.  In that 
case, everyone will drop off the video and dial back into the meeting using the conference 
number and PIN numbers that we distributed to all participants.  We certainly hope that will not 
be necessary. 
June 9–10, 2020
4 of 270


 
 
 
Finally, I want to begin by acknowledging the extraordinary and troubling events of the 
past couple of weeks.  Like many of you who are Bank presidents, last week I sent an internal 
message to all Board employees, and our message read as follows: 
The tragic events of recent days have left many of us deeply troubled.  Injustice, 
prejudice, and the callous disregard for life have led to social unrest and even a 
sense of despair. 
Especially in difficult times like these, I find some measure of comfort in the 
values, compassion, and support that make our Fed family strong.  Chief among 
those values is an unwavering commitment to treat one another with dignity and 
respect.  To be very clear, we reject racism in any form.  There is no place for it 
here and there should be no place for it in our country. 
Our core values underpin our ongoing work to foster a culture of diversity and 
inclusion.  These values give purpose to everything we do to strengthen and 
support the economy on behalf of the public we serve.  In particular, we stand 
together with African American members of the Fed family at a time when events 
may cause you to feel especially vulnerable. . . .  
I am proud to work alongside all of you in this public mission.  Our shared values 
and commitment to justice and dignity strengthen our community, help us serve 
and support one another, and equip us to carry out our work for the American 
people.  Thank you for all you are doing to help serve each other and the public. 
I think we should have our mutes on.  If—I can hear some pleasant background noise 
there, so—[laughter].  Thank you. 
Many, many—indeed, perhaps all of you—made similar internal statements, and 
appropriately so.  I think it’s important that we, as leaders of the Federal Reserve System, 
continue to communicate with force and clarity about our values and our unflinching 
commitment to pursue those values in our work as we pursue our mandated goals.  That includes 
the Board, the presidents, and anyone in a leadership role in any of our institutions. 
Tomorrow’s press conference is going to be my first public appearance since the uproar 
that began over George Floyd’s death, and I will say, at the end of my opening statement, the 
following: 
June 9–10, 2020
5 of 270


 
 
 
I want to acknowledge the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain 
of racial injustice in this country.  The Federal Reserve serves the entire nation.  
We operate in, and are part of, many of the communities across the country where 
Americans are grappling with and expressing themselves on issues of racial 
equality.  I speak for my colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System when 
I say that there is no place at the Federal Reserve for racism and there should be 
no place for it in our society.  Everyone deserves the opportunity to participate 
fully in our society and in our economy. 
These foundational principles guide us in all we do, from monetary policy to our 
focus on diversity and inclusion in our workplace, and to our work regulating and 
supervising banks to ensure fair access to credit around the country.  We will take 
this opportunity to renew our steadfast commitment to these principles, making 
sure that we are playing our part. 
We understand that the work of the Federal Reserve touches communities, 
families, and businesses across the country.  Everything we do is in service to our 
public mission.  We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the 
economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as 
robust as possible. 
Let us now move to the first of our briefings.  First up is our discussion of forward 
guidance, asset purchases, and yield curve targets.  We’ll have two staff briefings by Matthias 
Paustian and Paul Wood followed by a go-round.  Matthias, would you like to begin?  
MR. PAUSTIAN.1  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I will be referring to “Material for 
Briefing on Forward Guidance, Asset Purchases, and Yield Caps or Targets.”  I’ll 
summarize the analysis of forward guidance and of large-scale asset purchase policies 
that we presented in the staff memo “Macroeconomic Effects of Alternative 
Monetary Policies in Pandemic-Driven Recession Scenarios.”  The simulations I will 
review use the April Tealbook projection as the baseline.   
In our forward guidance simulations, which are shown on slide 2, we consider 
forward guidance in the form of credible announcements that policymakers will delay 
departure from the ELB until some specific improvement in the labor market or 
inflation has been achieved; thereafter, the federal funds rate follows the baseline 
policy rule.  The Tealbook projection, shown by the blue line in all the panels, 
includes such forward guidance—namely, that the federal funds rate will stay at the 
ELB until the unemployment rate has fallen to 4.3 percent, which occurs in early 
2023 in the baseline.  In this presentation, we consider an alternative unemployment 
rate threshold of 3.8 percent, and core PCE inflation thresholds of 2 percent and 2.25 
percent that may provide further accommodation.  In our forward guidance 
 
1 The materials used by Messrs. Paustian and Wood are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
June 9–10, 2020
6 of 270


 
 
 
simulations, we hold the size of the SOMA portfolio at its path in the April Tealbook 
baseline. 
As shown in the upper-left panel of slide 2, the 3.8 percent unemployment rate 
threshold, the dash-dot red line, and the 2 percent core inflation threshold, the dotted 
black line, both prescribe departing from the ELB in early 2024—one year later than 
in the April Tealbook, the solid blue line.  Because both policies use the same rule 
after liftoff, the similar policy rate paths over the longer horizon yield similar 
macroeconomic outcomes.  In particular, the inset box in the lower-left panel shows 
that the longer ELB spell lowers the unemployment rate an extra 0.5 percentage point 
by 2025 compared with the baseline.  The near-term effects on unemployment are 
small, however, because real activity responds slowly to policy actions in the 
FRB/US model.  Because we assume that price and wage setters are forward looking, 
the anticipation of less resource slack over the medium term than in the baseline 
results in upward near-term pressure on prices and wages.  The lower-right panel 
shows that core inflation under these two thresholds is a touch higher than in the 
baseline in coming years, but it nonetheless does not return to 2 percent until 
mid-2023. 
Under a 2.25 percent core inflation threshold, the dashed yellow lines, the federal 
funds rate stays at the ELB until early 2025—two years later than in the baseline.  
The later ELB departure leads to a more pronounced decline in the unemployment 
rate, to below 3 percent by 2024.  Core inflation returns to the 2 percent goal in 2022, 
about two years earlier than in the baseline, before modestly overshooting that goal 
for several years. 
Your next slide presents two illustrative LSAP programs.  Under LSAP program 1, 
we assume purchases of $110 billion per month of Treasury securities and agency 
MBS over the coming 12 months.  As a result, the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings, 
reported in the upper-left panel, expand $1.3 trillion, or 6 percent of GDP, more than 
in the April Tealbook baseline.  Under LSAP program 2, purchases are at a pace of 
$150 billion per month for 18 months, resulting in an extra $2.7 trillion, or 13 percent 
of GDP, in asset holdings. 
The upper-right panel shows the total term premium effect of Federal Reserve 
asset holdings on the 10-year Treasury yield.  Under LSAP program 1, the effect on 
the 10-year term premium is about 30 basis points more negative, on average, over 
the next three years than under the April Tealbook baseline.  Thanks to these more 
accommodative financial conditions, the unemployment rate, shown in the lower-left 
panel, declines a bit more rapidly over the medium term than under the baseline, 
hastening the departure of the federal funds rate from the ELB by one quarter, not 
shown.  As shown in the lower-right, core inflation is a bit higher than under the 
baseline over the medium term. 
Under LSAP program 2, the 10-year total term premium effect is about 65 basis 
points more negative at the end of the medium term than under the April baseline.  
Under this more forceful program, the unemployment rate declines a touch more than 
June 9–10, 2020
7 of 270


 
 
 
under LSAP program 1 over the next several years, while inflation runs modestly 
higher, peaking at 2.25 percent in 2025.  Consistent with this stronger economic 
outlook, the federal funds rate, not shown, departs the ELB half a year sooner than 
under the April baseline.  
Slide 4 presents some key messages and caveats.  To speed up the recovery, 
policymakers in our simulations must maintain accommodative financial conditions 
for many years—possibly even after unemployment and inflation have returned to 
their longer-run levels.  Under the second-wave scenario that is discussed in the 
memo, monetary policy would need to be accommodative for even longer than under 
the April Tealbook baseline. 
Of course, the effectiveness of policy measures in our simulations depends 
importantly on our modeling assumptions, not all of which may hold in the current 
extraordinary circumstances.  For example, forceful policy announcements may bring 
more immediate benefits than in our model—say, by cementing private-sector 
expectations around better outcomes or by reducing perceived tail risks.  Price and 
wage setters may be less forward looking than we have assumed, in which case a 
prompt achievement of the 2 percent inflation goal would require even stronger 
policy measures.  Additionally, in a low interest rate environment, longer-term 
nominal interest rates may be subject to a lower bound—a factor possibly limiting 
policymakers’ ability to apply downward pressure on term premiums through LSAPs. 
This concludes my prepared remarks.  Now Paul will review the international and 
U.S. experience with yield caps or targets.  
MR. WOOD.  Thank you, Matthias.  As the Committee considers policy options 
in response to the recession, it may be instructive to look at policies that have been 
used in other settings.  I will discuss the memo “Lessons on Yield Caps or Targets 
from International and U.S. Experience,” starting on slide 6.  The memo reviews the 
experience of the Federal Reserve in the 1940s and the more recent experiences of the 
Bank of Japan and the Reserve Bank of Australia in directly managing the yields of 
government securities.  Each of these central banks was trying to solve a different 
problem, so the objectives of their yield caps or targets have varied. 
In 1942, as the U.S. government ramped up spending for World War II, the 
Federal Reserve capped yields across the curve to keep Treasury borrowing costs low 
and stable. 
The Bank of Japan faced a different problem in 2016 as it sought to make ongoing 
stimulus more sustainable.  After years of large-scale asset purchases, the BOJ held 
40 percent of outstanding Japanese government bonds, and its overnight policy rate 
was negative 10 basis points.  With 10-year yields as low as negative 25 basis points, 
the BOJ became concerned about the adverse effect on Japanese financial institutions 
of an “excessive decline and flattening of the yield curve.”  To regain a slightly 
positive yield curve slope, the BOJ targeted the 10-year yield at zero. 
June 9–10, 2020
8 of 270


 
 
 
More recently, the Reserve Bank of Australia faced a situation similar to the Fed’s 
current circumstances.  In mid-March of this year, in response to the pandemic, the 
RBA board cut its overnight cash rate to 0.25 percent and gave forward guidance that 
the rate would not increase “until progress is being made towards full employment 
and it is confident that inflation will be sustainably within the 2 to 3 percent target 
band.”  To further support the economy, the RBA announced a 0.25 percent target for 
the three-year yield, “as it influences funding rates across much of the Australian 
economy” and is “consistent with the Board’s expectation that the cash rate will 
remain at its current level for some years.” 
What can we learn from these experiences?  First, as discussed in slide 7, a 
credible cap or target can control medium- to long-term government bond yields, pass 
through to private rates, and may not require large and protracted purchases.  As 
shown in the left chart, the BOJ was able to reduce its pace of purchases over time 
from ¥80 trillion per year to less than ¥20 trillion.  As shown to the right, the RBA’s 
purchases tapered quickly as the three-year yield settled at 0.25 percent. 
Second, a yield target can operate alongside purchases to meet other objectives.  
As the RBA bought bonds on the short end, the red bars, to achieve the 3-year yield 
target, it also bought longer-dated and state bonds to improve market functioning.  
Similarly, the BOJ has maintained its 10-year target as it also continued large-scale 
asset purchases—including a range of private-sector assets—aimed at stimulating the 
economy in various ways. 
Slide 8 discusses a few design features and exit challenges.  First, both the BOJ 
and the RBA allow some variation around their yield targets.  The BOJ initially 
allowed 10-year yields to move in an informal band of plus or minus 10 basis points 
around zero.  In July 2018, the BOJ doubled that band, aiming to encourage trading in 
the secondary market for Japanese government bonds.  The RBA has not indicated 
how much variation it would tolerate. 
Second, although the BOJ and RBA describe their targets as symmetric, they tend 
to be asymmetric in practice.  When yields have neared the top of its band, the BOJ 
has, on occasion, offered to buy unlimited amounts at a fixed rate.  In contrast, the 
BOJ has not sold bonds when the 10-year yield moved to the bottom of the band, in 
part because that could be seen as withdrawing stimulus. 
Third, conditioning exit on economic outcomes may pose challenges.  Progress 
toward policy objectives can pressure yields higher if investors perceive the target as 
inconsistent with fundamentals or expect it to be removed, and this could force 
increased central bank purchases to maintain the policy stance. 
More broadly, as discussed in the final slide, by committing to manage yields on 
securities with particular maturities, the central bank allows its balance sheet to be 
determined by market demand for those securities and by government issuance.  The 
historical experience of the Federal Reserve during World War II demonstrates this 
point.  The Federal Reserve established caps with a significant upward slope, from 0.375 
June 9–10, 2020
9 of 270


 
 
 
percent at 3 months to 2.5 percent at 25 years or longer.  With volatility held down, 
investors moved out of bills and into bonds to obtain higher yields, while the 
Treasury issued securities across the curve.  Amid steady pressure on the bill rate cap, 
the Federal Reserve absorbed 75 percent of Treasury bills by 1945. 
This historical experience also highlights that directly managing yields can bring 
monetary policy into conflict with the government’s debt management objectives.  
After the war ended, the Federal Reserve wanted to lift its yield caps to prevent rising 
inflation, while the government sought to keep financing costs low for the large debt 
built up during the war.  The Federal Reseve did lift the bill rate cap in 1947—which 
shifted investor demand toward the short end—but the Fed bought long-term bonds to 
maintain the cap on long-term rates.  The Fed negotiated with the Treasury periodic 
changes to the intermediate-rate caps, but this process made setting appropriate 
monetary policy challenging.  It was not until the Treasury–Federal Reserve Accord 
in 1951 that the Federal Reserve really regained independent monetary policy.  Thank 
you. That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you, Matthias.  Thank you, Paul.  This is the time for any 
questions there may be for our briefers.  If you have a question, you can type the word 
“question.”  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I was just curious—to the presenters:  There 
wasn’t much discussion in the memo of r*.  There was some, and there wasn’t much discussion 
of short-run r*.  I’m just curious, as you think about where short-run r* might be today, are these 
tools effective in actually getting the effective federal funds rate below—I mean, are we actually 
going to be providing accommodation, or are we still constrained so we’re not actually providing 
accommodation?  I’m expecting that short-run r* has fallen a lot.  How close do you think we 
get to making up that gap?  Thank you. 
MR. PAUSTIAN.  That’s a difficult question.  I haven’t seen any model results on this.  
We estimated that, in the Great Recession, short-run r* was highly negative—I believe on the 
order of minus 6 percent, minus 8 percent, or so—in the short run.  It’s really difficult, in the 
current situation, to think about short-run r* because part of the pandemic is to—you know, we 
have supply effects there, too, so I can’t really make a good judgment other than acknowledge 
June 9–10, 2020
10 of 270


 
 
 
that I think this is a really, really difficult situation to get a sense of what the right short-run r* is 
and how much accommodation the FOMC can provide. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Further questions?  Either on the Skype session or—if you want to 
just wave your hand, that’s okay, too.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, let’s begin our go-
round on these matters, starting with Governor Clarida, please. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  For this meeting, the staff has prepared two 
excellent memos that are both timely and substantive.  I will begin my comments with some 
general observations on our initial economic conditions that the Committee confronts and the 
toolkit we can deploy to achieve our dual-mandate goals.  I’ll then offer some specific thoughts 
on the forward guidance and LSAP memo and the yield curve control memo. 
Even allowing for a robust recovery to commence in the third quarter, the U.S. economy 
may well end the year 2020 with an unemployment rate near 10 percent, with core PCE close to 
100 basis points below our target, and with an output gap of at least 7 percent of GDP.  If so, we 
will enter 2021 further away from our dual-mandate goals than we were entering 2009. 
In paragraph 1 of our current FOMC statement, we say we are committed to using our 
full range of tools to help achieve our objectives.  To state the obvious—and piggybacking on 
something Neel just said—we’re at the effective lower bound now and likely to be here for some 
time, and the ELB is a binding constraint, and so it’s going to be important for us to rely on other 
tools.  Indeed, that’s all we can do—we can’t rely on cutting rates.  In particular, we’ll need to be 
ready to consider using tools that are both familiar and perhaps also untried, and we may need to 
deploy bold and creative variants of both forward guidance and balance sheet policy to have a 
fighting chance of achieving our dual-mandate goals over any reasonable time horizon. 
June 9–10, 2020
11 of 270


 
 
 
Now, especially with regard to balance sheet policy, there are certainly costs as well as 
benefits, and I am on record as recently as January of this year commenting that, with respect to 
the Federal Reserve’s GFC balance sheet programs, the benefits to me appear to decline, and the 
costs appear to rise.  But in the circumstances that we now confront, I recognize—and I think 
these memos do support the view—that while there may be diminishing returns to balance sheet 
policy, the benefits remain positive, especially when compared against the cost of falling further 
short of both pillars of our dual mandate. 
With regard to the forward guidance and LSAP memo, the authors consider several 
variants of threshold forward guidance.  In the baseline variant, the FOMC is presumed not to lift 
off from the ELB until the unemployment rate reaches the staff’s estimate of long-run u*, 4.3 
percent.  This is, in effect, a baseline very similar to what the FOMC did in 2015 when it lifted 
off from the ELB when the unemployment rate was in the neighborhood of the Committee’s 
estimate of long-run u*, but, of course, well before core PCE inflation had risen to 2 percent. 
In this baseline, as was the case in 2015, the Fed begins to hike before core inflation 
reaches 2 percent.  In other variants in the memo, the Committee would delay liftoff until an 
inflation threshold of either 2 percent or 2.25 percent is reached.  The 2 percent threshold delays 
liftoff by about a year in the simulations, and the 2.25 percent threshold delays liftoff by about 
two years—four years after hitting the ELB.  In the staff simulations, both inflation threshold 
policies result in a modest overshoot of the 2 percent inflation target.  A notable feature of these 
simulations is that the inflation thresholds have a material effect on actual inflation years before 
the thresholds are reached, an insight due originally to work by Reifschneider and Williams. 
Achieving this outcome would depend on the public and markets believing that the Fed, 
unlike in 2015, would not lift off until the inflation threshold had been crossed.  And I point out, 
June 9–10, 2020
12 of 270


 
 
 
in this model, the inflation threshold is always crossed after the unemployment threshold, given 
the Phillips curve structure.  In my judgment—and I know this is for a future meeting—
considering a revision to our consensus statement that would allow for such an overshoot under 
circumstances similar to what we face today would greatly enhance the credibility of such a 
policy.  
The memo also considers two different LSAP programs, and I’ll focus on the second one, 
which would entail a substantial increase in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet split between 
Treasury securities and MBS.  In these simulations, the LSAP program is paired with a liftoff 
rule for the policy rate.  And that’s an important insight.  You can’t think about these tools in 
isolation; you have to think about them as a package.  In the simulations, the large LSAP 
program, when paired with other policies, again leads to a persistent but moderate overshoot of 
the inflation target and tends to push up inflation before the other thresholds are reached.  Again, 
I think if we were to consider something like this, it would be important to pair it with some 
revisions to our consensus statement. 
Regarding the yield curve control memo, it offers valuable cross-country comparisons of 
how yield curve control is being implemented and practiced at the BOJ and, since March of this 
year, by the RBA.  It also offers a concise review of the U.S. experience with yield curve control 
during and after World War II. 
I’ll focus my comments on the BOJ and RBA experience, as these seem more directly 
relevant to the circumstances we confront today.  In the case of Australia, the RBA is using yield 
curve control as a complement to calendar-based forward guidance on the policy rate.  In the 
case of Japan, the introduction of yield curve control appears to have been motivated by a desire 
to scale back the amount of JGB purchases required to achieve the goals of their QE program. 
June 9–10, 2020
13 of 270


 
 
 
One thing that both Japan and Australia do share in common is that neither has put in 
place a regime of formal yield curve caps.  Indeed, the RBA has noted that their judgment is that 
it would not make sense to counter natural variation of yields on three-year bonds around its 
target yield of 25 basis points.  The BOJ as well has expressed its yield curve control regime in 
essence as a target of zero with a range of plus or minus 10 or even 20 basis points.  In the case 
of Japan, it does appear as though yield curve control has enabled the BOJ to scale back the 
amount of purchases required relative to the pre–yield curve control experience.  And in the case 
of the RBA, obviously, they have only recently begun.  It has continued open market purchases 
along the entire curve for market-functioning purposes. 
To conclude, what I take away from all of this on yield curve control is that I do think of 
it as complement to other policies that we might consider.  That said, it would seem that 
implementing yield curve control in a regime with threshold guidance on rates could be more 
complex to implement and communicate.  And I believe we would benefit from further 
discussion of yield curve control in the staff briefings, focused on potential options for 
implementing in the United States.  Thank you, Chair Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker, please. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  First, I want to thank the staff as well for their 
work on the excellent memos.  I agree with the staff analysis that forward guidance and LSAPs 
are unlikely to provide much more additional accommodation.  Beyond the specifics of the 
models, a simple look at the Treasury yield curve and market expectations for policy already 
show that there is not a lot more accommodation to provide unless we go really far out on the 
yield curve. 
June 9–10, 2020
14 of 270


 
 
 
Consistent with this, the memo finds that the forward guidance would require a 
commitment to extraordinarily long horizons for any meaningful improvement to the outlook, a 
commitment that I am uncomfortable with.  LSAPs perhaps have a bit more left to give, and the 
expected increase in Treasury security issuance effectively gives us a bit more policy space, 
though it make take all the LSAPs we can do to keep in the same place, if I may paraphrase the 
Red Queen in Alice in Wonderland.  In short, there are no bazookas left in our unconventional 
but tested toolkit. 
As a protracted recovery looms, we definitely should look at all options.  And if there is 
time to be bold, as Governor Clarida said, this is it.  That said, I am skeptical about yield curve 
control.  Simply put, it does not seem advisable to subordinate a tested tool—LSAPs—to an 
untested one—yield curve control—for what appear to be meager gains that come with an array 
of significant risks and challenges. 
One obvious risk is that markets will put pressure on our yield target, requiring large 
increases in our asset holdings, potentially leaving our balance sheet with a very uneven maturity 
composition.  Yet I am also concerned about what yield curve control could do to market 
functioning and the private sector’s balance sheet. 
As our previous experience during the Second World War with yield curve controls 
shows, banks and investors may aggressively shift the maturity of their Treasury security 
holdings and in somewhat unpredictable ways.  This could lead to difficulties at exit and an 
excessive “footprint” in some markets for Treasury securities. 
I am also concerned that yield curve control requires a degree of coordination with the 
Treasury that may prove difficult to achieve.  I’m also wary about onboarding yield curve control 
in our day-to-day monetary policy decisions.  We may be reducing market volatility of, say, the 
June 9–10, 2020
15 of 270


 
 
 
five-year Treasury yield, but we’re adding policy uncertainty to it.  I would rather direct 
monetary policy to interest rate levels that are governed by a well-communicated path of short 
rates than through influencing term premiums, and I do not see large gains that offset these 
concerns.  Treasury rates are already very low, and a cap of 50 basis points would not bind for 
any maturity shorter than five years.  Beyond that tenor, yield curve control seems simply 
unfeasible.  Optimistically, we may gain something—10 or 20 basis points in accommodation. 
I do see how yield curve control would reinforce forward guidance, but there is no 
indication that our forward guidance needs any reinforcing.  This Committee has given credible 
forward guidance in the past and should be able to do so again without the need of major works 
of financial engineering.  I could also see how yield curve control could help to limit the size of 
LSAPs.  But that’s, again, a solution to a problem that I don’t believe we have, and we still have 
room to grow our balance sheet. 
So, to summarize, yield curve control comes with large challenges, risks, and unknowns, 
and I do not see meaningful advantages.  And while I would never say never to a tool because we 
never know what we’re going to face, at this point I don’t see implementing yield curve control 
in the short-to-medium run.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans, please. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d like to say it’s good to see my “map” 
colleagues up close and so personal—interesting technology.  Thank you to the staff for the 
memos; they helped clarify my thinking on a number of issues. 
Clearly, tools other than the setting of the federal funds rate will play an important role in 
monetary policy over the next few years, and completing our update to the long-run strategic 
framework will be vitally important.  In my baseline scenario, which may be optimistic, I have 
June 9–10, 2020
16 of 270


 
 
 
the economy returning to the 2019 fourth-quarter level of GDP around 2022.  But even when that 
milestone is achieved, the unemployment rate will likely be 5 percent or higher, and inflation 
will still be below 2 percent.  As a central bank charged with achieving price stability, we need to 
get to 2 percent inflation and then generate an overshoot to be true to our symmetric target.  A 
great deal of work lies ahead to fulfill both sides of our dual mandate. 
The first memo presents forward guidance and asset purchases scenarios that are able to 
get inflation to 2 percent by 2022 or ’23.  This seems optimistic to me.  As the memo points out, 
there are many caveats to that trajectory.  Importantly, if expectations are more dependent on 
current and past economic conditions, stronger accommodative actions would be needed.  Of 
course, this is in the baseline health scenario. 
In the memo’s second-wave virus scenario, the FOMC will need to promise to hold the 
funds rate at zero for 10 years with full credibility to get inflation to 2 percent.  I think this result 
highlights the point that addressing such severe economic conditions will almost certainly 
require even more aggressive and persistent fiscal policy responses than we’ve seen so far. 
Nevertheless, fighting persistently low inflation under all conditions is the responsibility 
of the monetary authority.  What tools should we bring to this job?  First, completing the review 
of our long-run framework will be key.  Our updated framework should clarify our inflation 
objective, explicitly stating that it’s two-sided in nature and that we are willing to overshoot 
2 percent.  I think we need strong language here, but that discussion is for another day.  Also, we 
need to update what we mean by “maximum employment” and how we would respond to 
stronger labor market conditions by emphasizing employment shortfalls rather than the long-run 
normal unemployment rates. 
June 9–10, 2020
17 of 270


 
 
 
Second, there are operational tools under discussion today:  forward guidance, asset 
purchases, and yield curve control.  Over the past dozen years, we’ve gained a lot of experience 
with forward guidance and asset purchases.  Our policy experts have studied them, and the 
FOMC and other central banks have deployed both tools extensively. 
We have a pretty good idea of their strengths and their limitations.  Yield curve control is 
much less understood.  I have many more questions than confident answers.  I can imagine this 
tool usefully amplifying our policy intentions, perhaps without adding lots of long-duration 
assets, but I can also see many difficulties in its use.  The details will be important.  And whether 
we’re talking about asset purchases or yield curve control—especially at the long end of the 
curve—our plans for the balance sheet will be an important determinant of success. 
My questions about yield curve control include which maturities to target and how to 
design a cap structure that’s robust to changing economic conditions.  If the Committee was 
committing to a flat policy rate for a fixed calendar period, then a reasonable argument could be 
made for a cap over the corresponding part of the yield curve.  This could bolster the credibility 
of our commitment to a flat rate path if the public was skeptical about it.  But if there’s little 
doubt about this commitment, the added value of the yield curve cap is unclear to me. 
With regard to targeting rates further out on the curve, the endogenous nature of longer-
maturity nominal yields makes me nervous.  For example, upward pressure on long rates could 
be a strong signal of policy success.  Inflation expectations could be improving or real rates 
could be rising due a stronger economic situation.  In such cases, the Desk would have to 
purchase assets to defend the peg.  The stronger the state of real economic growth or inflation is, 
the more assets we would have to buy.  This highlights how a critical ingredient of yield curve 
June 9–10, 2020
18 of 270


 
 
 
control is accepting what it might mean for the balance sheet.  If we are hesitant to do that, then 
I’m concerned that the policy wouldn’t deliver the desired accommodation in the first place. 
Then there’s a question of exit.  Before we start with any yield curve control approach, 
we will need to think hard about how to ultimately end the peg.  I’m open minded, but simply 
announcing an end to a peg seems problematic.  And particularly if we wanted an outcome-based 
policy, I suspect designing a smooth exit strategy may be pretty complicated and difficult to 
execute.  I think Vice Chair Clarida put it well when he said the interaction with forward 
guidance could make that particularly tricky.  Missteps would impair needed credibility, so I 
would like to see more staff analysis on this topic. 
In conclusion, our long-run framework review will provide a solid foundation for our 
policy actions.  When the time comes for us to adjust policy tools, I’m comfortable with our 
ability to design a program of forward guidance and asset purchases appropriate to the situation.  
I will note that the forward guidance threshold approach in which we keep the funds rate where it 
is until inflation is above 2.25 percent, on page 2 of the handout, had the most prompt inflation 
overshoot of 2 percent to the forward guidance that we saw. 
I could see rate caps at the shortest end of the curve playing a minor complementary role, 
but I am less confident about designing an effective strategy for controlling endogenous market 
rates very far out.  I will admit that taking duration out of the market may be less important now 
than it was after the great financial crisis.  If yield curve control can help thread the needle, that 
would be useful.  So I have more questions. 
All this said, considering the pandemic risks and rising social unrest, my deeper concern 
at the moment is that our monetary policy decisions will be of second-order importance.  If the 
current reopenings compromise health and safety objectives, if the virus spreads and more 
June 9–10, 2020
19 of 270


 
 
 
hotspots emerge, and if consumers begin to hold back because of numerous fears, then worse 
economic scenarios will take hold.  We can help, but it will take a lot more than monetary policy 
action to address this level of economic distress.  Only strong fiscal actions, greatly improved 
public health solutions, and strong leadership can truly deliver better economic outcomes.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren, please. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Asset purchases have been very helpful in 
addressing the recent disruptions in the Treasury securities markets and MBS markets.  Both 
these markets have settled down.  The problems created by panic selling are now behind us, and 
the two-year and five-year Treasury rates are below 25 basis points and 50 basis points, 
respectively. 
As a result, limited room remains for further reductions of these rates, as Presidents 
Harker and Evans have just discussed.  While purchases of securities can help offset upward 
pressure on rates from significant Treasury debt issuance or news consistent with an improving 
economy—such as experienced last Friday with the release of the May employment report—I 
view the current economic effect of Treasury security purchases to be limited by how low rates 
already have fallen. 
Committing to additional purchases will be helpful and should be done, but for now, the 
major effect is likely to be from the communications and forward guidance that accompany the 
purchases.  I would provide forward guidance indicating that we plan to keep the federal funds 
rate at the effective lower bound and to conduct purchases of MBS and longer-dated Treasury 
securities at least until the unemployment rate is in the range of full employment. 
June 9–10, 2020
20 of 270


 
 
 
Given how high the unemployment rate is currently, such guidance will clearly signal 
that asset purchases and low short-term interest rates will provide stimulus to the real economy 
for an extended period of time.  I would note that since the spreads embedded in private-sector 
interest rates relative to Treasury rates are particularly large at present, using 13(3) facilities to 
reduce those spreads may be our most potent policy tool at this time. 
For question 2, rate targets and yield curve tools can be very useful.  In effect, they can 
provide a combination of forward guidance and QE directed at a particular segment of the yield 
curve.  Targeting rates can be particularly effective if shorter-dated Treasury yields remain 
elevated when the federal funds rate has already been lowered to the lower bound. 
Under current conditions, however, short-term Treasury rates are relatively low, and the 
market already seems convinced that the federal funds rate will remain at the lower bound for 
some time.  I would therefore prefer the flexibility to purchase across the yield curve and would 
approve of policies that make more open-ended purchases, possibly concentrating purchases at 
longer maturities to maximize their economic effect. 
Thus, while deploying yield curve control at this time may not be as effective as asset 
purchases combined with strong forward guidance, I would certainly not rule out yield curve 
control or targeting rates if financial conditions change.  I would note that choosing yield curve 
control or targeting interest rates can also result in a more complicated exit strategy but may be 
worth doing if rates remain higher than is justified by appropriate policy. 
To the third question, at this time, the most effective tools would be strong forward 
guidance accompanied by open-ended purchases tied to economic outcomes.  Personally, I 
would prefer an unemployment rate trigger.  Perhaps more importantly, we should continue to 
explore how we can use 13(3) facilities to narrow the large spreads on private-sector instruments 
June 9–10, 2020
21 of 270


 
 
 
relative to Treasury rates, which, in conjunction with the current policy commitments, should 
result in a quicker return to both elements of the dual mandate.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic, please. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’d like to begin by thanking the staff for 
producing the thoughtful memos.  They frame the issues in ways that help me think about them 
in a more structured way, and that allows me to speak to the questions at hand with more clarity. 
As generic tools, forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases are certainly among 
the primary tools for policy at the effective lower bound.  We have had the benefit of some 
experience with these tools over the past decade, and that experience has shown them to be 
effective.  However, as the memo discusses, the efficacy of these tools in the current crisis is still 
uncertain and will depend on details, especially those related to economic conditionality, 
monetary policy transmission, and communication. 
As an aside, I think we should view communication as a tool in its own right, a 
complement to these other tools.  And by “communication,” I mean everything from the wording 
of the forward guidance and our large-scale asset purchase programs in the statement to the 
portfolio of press conferences, speeches, testimonies, SEPs, and other events in which we are 
collectively engaged. 
There are a few different objectives for communication:  to align the understanding of the 
Committee’s current and future response function in the eyes of market participants, business, 
and households, with the understanding of the Committee; to enhance the credibility of any 
statement related to future actions and responses; and to balance the understanding and 
credibility with flexibility to adapt to changing conditions, among others. 
June 9–10, 2020
22 of 270


 
 
 
The first memo nicely lays out several alternatives for forward guidance and asset 
purchases, and it describes various interpretations of these alternatives by the public and how 
those interpretations might affect attainment of the dual-mandate goals.  What I’m struggling 
with is how to bring some analytical structure to this discussion of potential public 
interpretations.  For example, in the memo, the forward guidance alternatives have economic 
conditionality, but the asset purchase programs are based on amounts and dates. 
Does this matter?  Can we use them together effectively?  And, if so, does this rely on a 
particular layering of the tools—first, forward guidance, and then asset purchases?  Can we 
articulate a strategy for deploying these tools so that communication is more cohesive and clear?  
And what would a communication strategy that complements the tool strategy look like? 
To compound these questions about the role of communication, like others, I am also 
concerned about the limited potency of these tools related to their previous usage following the 
financial crisis.  When the FOMC began using date-based forward guidance in August 2011, the 
10-year Treasury rate was at 2.3 percent.  Given that the rate now sits at approximately 
0.9 percent, what does that imply for the efficacy of our forward guidance and asset purchase 
tools in the current situation? 
My big-picture “takeaway” from reading this memo is that it seems clear that, across a 
variety of policy alternatives, we are likely to find ourselves at the ELB for years—and may well 
confront an ELB on long-term rates.  Given our experience over the past decade with rates at or 
near the effective lower bound and persistently low inflation, I am finding myself wanting to 
know much more about our understanding of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  In 
particular, what are our options for action if long rates stay very low, the yield curve remains flat, 
and the economy receives another shock? 
June 9–10, 2020
23 of 270


 
 
 
Regarding targeting of interest rates along the yield curve, I began reading the memo 
with two questions in my head.  What are we trying to accomplish with this tool?  And what are 
the costs and benefits related to other alternatives?  On the first question, the memo mentions 
four possible objectives:  reinforcing forward guidance near the ELB, maintaining low rates 
throughout the economy, improving the functioning of the market for Treasury securities, and 
facilitating coordination with the Treasury related to the composition of new debt issuance. 
All four of these overlap with potential objectives for a large-scale asset purchase 
program.  In other words, it seems that yield curve targeting is, for the United States right now, 
more of a potential substitute for large-scale asset purchases than a complement.  Put more 
directly, I currently do not see a case for viewing yield curve targeting as an independent tool 
that can be effective in, say, a potential scenario in which large-scale asset purchases were done 
but did not achieve the sufficient progress toward our policy goals.  If I am missing something 
here, I would appreciate more work by the staff to flesh this out. 
That brings us to the question of how yield curve targeting compares with large-scale 
asset purchases and its ability to achieve the four objectives.  My staff and I spent some time 
exploring this issue and came up with a few preliminary observations and more questions.  First, 
large-scale asset purchases seem to have worked well this spring to improve the functioning in 
the Treasury securities market.  When it is not the level of yield, per se, but liquidity that is an 
issue, the asset purchase program can be flexible and effective in ways that yield curve targeting 
cannot. 
Second, in terms of reinforcing forward guidance, one clear difference between using 
asset purchases versus yield curve targeting with forward guidance on the overnight rate is that 
June 9–10, 2020
24 of 270


 
 
 
yield curve targeting could well involve sales even during the period of forward guidance.  This 
may pose a direct communication challenge, but likely one that could be handled. 
An additional related communication question:  Would the public perhaps perceive a 
stronger commitment on our behalf of doing whatever it takes with the yield curve targeting than 
with a large-scale asset purchase program?  How can we judge whether this is likely to be true?  
And how could we use communication to support that perception if it were indeed what we 
meant?  On this point, Japan’s experience with yield curve targeting suggests that market 
perceptions of targeting could result in a smaller increase in the balance sheet than under the use 
of asset purchases.  To the extent that the balance sheet size is an issue, yield curve targeting 
might be preferable.  I would note, though, that questions remain as to whether the efficacy of 
the Federal Reserve yield curve targeting program would match the effectiveness seen in Japan. 
Finally, does the fact that yield curve targeting is price based while large-scale asset 
purchases are quantity based imply any differences in operations and market function effects?  If 
we were to seriously consider yield curve targeting, I would like to see some staff analysis of 
what it would take to defend the target in terms of potential weekly operation sizes and whether 
operational details like CUSIP limits would be problematic. 
Also, what might be the risks to committing to a program in which our purchase and sale 
activity is responding to market forces in the longer part of the curve?  We’ve always had a “do 
no harm” stance toward the Treasury and operationalize that by striving to be transparent and as 
predictable as possible in our purchase schedule.  It seems to me that yield curve targeting would 
make our Desk operations much less predictable on a weekly and monthly basis, and I am 
curious to know what the ramifications of that would be for financial markets. 
June 9–10, 2020
25 of 270


 
 
 
In sum, I see forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases as our primary frontline 
tools to provide further accommodation when it is warranted at the ELB.  For me right now, 
there are still many questions to be answered before I can assess the relative merits of yield curve 
targeting as a substitute for asset purchases.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard, please. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have just a few remarks on the possible roles 
for forward guidance, large-scale asset purchases, and yield curve targeting.  My first remark is 
that I believe we are currently benefiting from the 2007–16 era of monetary policy in the United 
States to an extraordinary degree.  That era showed that the FOMC was willing to keep rates at 
historically low levels for many years, so long as inflation pressures remained muted. 
In the end, there was no sustained liftoff of the policy rate until 2017.  The peak 
unemployment rate for the 2007–09 shock was 10 percent, whereas today the unemployment rate 
is substantially higher, so that by this and other metrics, the current shock is much sharper than 
the one experienced from 2007 to 2009.  And after the 2007–09 period, the challenge was to get 
markets to expect that the FOMC would keep rates low, and that inflation pressure was likely to 
remain muted. 
As a consequence of the actions of this Committee from 2007 to 2016, in the present 
situation, financial markets and macroeconomic observers arguably already expect that the 
FOMC will keep the policy rate low for a very long time—and here I’m agreeing with President 
Harker and others—and that inflation pressure will likely remain muted during the period when 
the policy rate is at the effective lower bound.  Medium- and longer-term Treasury yield 
expectations are, at least for now, about where we’d like them to be as an appropriate reflection 
of the intent of the Committee’s future settings of the policy rate and the likely accompanying 
June 9–10, 2020
26 of 270


 
 
 
inflation developments.  In short, we enjoy an advantage in the current situation that we did not 
have during the 2007–09 period. 
A corollary to this thought is that we should perhaps expect additional forward guidance 
and additional LSAPs to appear to be ineffective relative to previous implementations, as they 
are likely to be widely anticipated this time around.  This may appear to be worrisome, but 
actually it may be a benefit of this Committee’s aggressive actions during the 2007–16 period. 
As a bottom line, in my judgment, we can afford to wait and see, with respect to yield 
curve targeting measures at this juncture.  They may be needed if an expectation developed in 
markets that the FOMC intended to pursue a premature liftoff, but that does not appear to be the 
expectation at this time. 
I have several broader remarks on yield curve targeting.  An important drawback is that 
yield curve targeting may prove to be incompatible with central bank independence.  Central 
banks that lose their ability to act independently from the rest of government have a very poor 
track record with respect to macroeconomic goals like inflation control and stable labor markets. 
A benefit of yield curve targeting is that it can be effective without large-scale asset 
purchases, and here I am going to echo Governor Clarida and others.  In Japan, yield curve 
targeting effectively replaced a state-based asset purchase program in which the desired state was 
2 percent inflation.  I think it’s a caution for us all, when we’re thinking about state-based policy, 
to name states that we think we can achieve, because Japan has been caught by naming a target 
that they haven’t been able to achieve.  When that level of inflation failed to materialize, it made 
sense to target yields directly and conserve on purchases of JGBs.  This has been “successful” in 
some ways, but not in attaining the 2 percent inflation goal.  It’s not clear to me that we are in the 
Bank of Japan situation at this juncture. 
June 9–10, 2020
27 of 270


 
 
 
On the notion that yield curve targets have effectively been caps, I would comment that 
in the United States, in the 1940s experience, caps were arguably not binding for much of the 
period.  My suggestion is that nonbinding caps are unlikely to be very effective, as they change 
the equilibrium only in certain states of the world and only if they are completely credible in 
those particular states.  Much depends on exactly what these states are and the precise location of 
the caps. 
Theory would suggest that there is a “correct” yield curve from the policymaker’s 
perspective, taking as given the future intended policy rate path, along with the expected future 
evolution of the economy.  Setting yield curve policy targets equal to this correct yield curve 
would likely work well, because these are the very same yields that would be the equilibrium 
outcomes in a competitive equilibrium with a given policy path—here, I am echoing President 
Evans a little bit.  However, this would require the Committee to adjust these yield curve targets’ 
values each period as the economy continues to evolve.  Failure to adjust appropriately could 
lead to seemingly odd behavior, such as market participants wishing to hold only fixed-price 
short-term debt or only fixed-price medium-term debt or only fixed-price longer-term debt, 
because the relative prices between these debt types are inappropriate for the situation, as they 
have not been adjusted in response to the changing environment. 
This seems to have actually happened in the United States’ wartime and postwar 
experience in the 1940s, and this was covered a little bit in today’s presentation.  So I guess the 
point would be that, if you want to do yield curve control, you’re going to have to adjust the 
targets in an appropriate way at each juncture.  The 1940s experience, I would note, ended in an 
unsatisfactory way.  Contemporaries were unhappy after the war and with the policy that led up 
June 9–10, 2020
28 of 270


 
 
 
to the Treasury–Federal Reserve Accord, and subsequent scholarly research was also negative on 
the experience. 
With respect to the idea of maintaining yield curve targeting as a way to provide forward 
guidance, I have long argued on this Committee that I generally prefer state-based to calendar-
based guidance.  I think it is hard to rationalize calendar-based guidance, which is somehow 
independent of actual economic events. 
Nevertheless, the SEP could be viewed as a sort of calendar-based guidance, which has 
already been institutionalized, and it is not clear to me how new types of yield-curve-targeting 
forward guidance would interact with the SEP.  It is true that yield curve targeting would name 
yields out the maturity structure that the Committee would like to see, but these proposed yields 
would also have to be consistent with a proposed future path of the policy rate coming from the 
SEP.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My own view is that the experience since early 
2000 suggests that forward guidance is a useful tool, and I think it is particularly effective when 
it is outcome based and not date based.  I also think there is an argument that large-scale asset 
purchases have also been helpful in previous periods in pushing down longer-term yields, again, 
particularly if they involve open-ended purchases that are outcome based. 
I would just comment regarding asset purchases, which I’m sure we’ll debate more on 
another day.  In the current situation that we’re in, I’m very mindful that health-care policies may 
have more to do, at this stage, with driving economic outcomes than other policies, and that also 
fiscal policy is critical.  And I do worry currently about the speculative nature that’s developing 
in the financial markets.  Put another way, I’m confident about the potent effects of asset 
June 9–10, 2020
29 of 270


 
 
 
purchases on financial markets.  I’m a little less confident about the potent effects on economic 
outcomes.  There is an effect, I’m convinced, but I would think we need to trade those two things 
off, and I’m a little worried at the moment about some of the things I see developing in the 
financial markets.  Having said that, we’re in the middle of a crisis, and we’ll come back to that. 
Regarding yield curve control, in debating this extensively with my team, I honestly have 
more questions and concerns than I do answers.  I do understand the pro argument that, in a 
period when you’ve got very large and rising fiscal deficits and rising public debt, if Treasury 
yields start to be driven by that, I could see where the Federal Reserve is going to have to take a 
close look at that situation.  Otherwise, I’m concerned about some of the destabilizing effects, 
potentially, of yield curve control, particularly if it’s a forward commitment.  Obviously, if the 
economy weakens, yields generally decline, and that puts less pressure on the central bank to 
purchase securities. 
Conversely, as has been mentioned by others, I’m worried about a situation when the 
economy strengthens and yields tend to increase, and yet we’ve made a commitment potentially 
to a yield level—we’re forced to increase asset purchases at a time when we actually don’t want 
to be providing more stimulus.  So, obviously, as others have said, the details of this will matter, 
but I’m worried about the implementation. 
I also do worry about central bank independence.  The 13(3) programs we’ve done have 
been, in my opinion, highly appropriate and needed, but I also am cognizant that they have 
blurred the line between Federal Reserve independence and Treasury functions.  I think it was 
necessary in light of this crisis, but I’m very concerned about taking other steps which may 
further blur that line.  I’m conscious of the fact that the last time yield curve control was done in 
June 9–10, 2020
30 of 270


 
 
 
the United States was during wartime, and I’m not sure that the current situation rises to that 
level at which it’s worth jeopardizing or putting into question that independence. 
As others have mentioned, I am extremely concerned, once you start yield curve control, 
how you wean the market off yield curve control.  By the way, I have the same concern around 
asset purchases—how do you wean the market off them?  But I’m particularly concerned about 
yield curve control, because, if the markets start to anticipate that we would like to exit, they 
obviously will take their own actions, which may complicate this exit.  And we may be in a 
situation in which we’re creating unintentionally negative effects on the financial markets and 
distorted effects because of that. 
Other issues and questions I have—what is the effect of yield curve control on asset 
allocators and asset allocation?  For those who want to balance owning Treasury securities 
against equity exposure, how does this affect asset allocations, what kind of distortions does this 
create, and what are the implications?  We’ll worry about the effects on the U.S. dollar, on 
currencies generally, and on confidence in currencies:  Could this type of further action 
accelerate adoption of non-dollar-denominated or even digital reserve currencies? 
I guess all these points are a way of saying, is yield curve control—and, by the way, also 
if we go too far with asset purchases—going to encourage the market to start asking even more 
than they are currently, is the Fed doing too much?  Are we overdoing it?  Is the Fed now 
becoming a crutch for the market, creating speculative activity, which will make it very hard 
then for us to withdraw and may even be a source of instability?  All this while the Fed may be, 
due to yield curve control, potentially losing control of its balance sheet because of commitments 
we make. 
June 9–10, 2020
31 of 270


 
 
 
I guess all this is a long way of saying, I would rather rely on forward guidance and asset 
purchases at this point.  I’d be open minded about reconsidering, at a future date, yield curve 
control.  But, as the Fed has already injected substantial liquidity into financial markets and 
Treasury rates appear to be muted, at least at the moment, I’d want to defer this debate on that 
point until we see the situation change. 
And I continue to worry about the increasing disconnect between what’s going on in the 
real economy and in the financial markets and what the implications are for that, in terms of Fed 
credibility and our ability to do what needs to be done to further drive and improve the economy 
to meet our dual-mandate objectives.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin, please. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My perspectives on these tools are grounded in 
three beliefs.  First, we’re better off with more tools at our disposal to support public confidence 
that we can handle any eventuality.  Second, we should promise only the effects we can credibly 
deliver.  And, third, we should only use our tools when they’re fit for the purpose—call that 
“horses for courses.” 
Overall, then, I’m happy to have forward guidance, asset purchases, and yield curve 
targeting in our toolkit when they are fit for the purpose.  But, like many of the previous 
speakers, I’d counsel us against overpromising and overcommitting to them right now because, 
at least today, the flatness of the yield curve suggests to me they will have relatively lower 
effects. 
On yield curve targeting, I admit to being intrigued by the scenarios in which we 
announce a target and actually avoid balance sheet purchases as the market reacts to our 
announcement.  But I have to say, I don’t think the challenge will be announcing the program, 
June 9–10, 2020
32 of 270


 
 
 
but will be—and President Evans and Kaplan have both gone there—announcing the end of the 
program.  Exiting artificially influenced market rates can be messy—think foreign exchange 
pegs or even the taper tantrum—and the political exit can be messy, too.  For more color, I 
highly recommend a piece by Richmond Fed alumnus Bob Hetzel and Ralph Leach on the drama 
associated with the 1951 Treasury–Fed Accord. 
On LSAPs, my only caution is on the sizing of the effect.  Tealbook B has continually 
estimated quite sizable term premium effects.  I know we have sophisticated models, but my 
market contacts estimate the effect much more conservatively. 
On forward guidance, the memo assumes a significant near-term inflation effect.  Like 
President Evans, I guess I just wonder whether in fact that may or may not be the case.  It also 
shows second-wave scenarios in which we don’t have liftoff from the lower bound until as late 
as 2030.  That made me ask whether our analyses fully assess the potential costs of an extended 
period at the lower bound.  Intuitively, I think they’re significant, and I’d appreciate any efforts 
the staff could take to make them more explicit.  I’m thinking of costs like excess leverage, 
outlined in a recent NBER paper on indebted demand by Mian and coauthors; reach-for-yield 
behaviors, especially outside the banking system; market volatility; and a reduction in the 
effectiveness of intertemporal substitution. 
As an aside, 2030 is a long time away.  And 1928 and the Roaring Twenties surely felt a 
lot different than people would have imagined during the 1918 second wave of the previous 
pandemic.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George, please. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to first thank the staff for the work 
they’ve done to continue to provide high-quality analysis on these memos and, frankly, the 
June 9–10, 2020
33 of 270


 
 
 
Tealbook too.  When you think about not just working from home, but—I think about the staff 
who are working while parenting and while teaching and other kinds of caregiving, so my thanks 
for this work. 
We’ve had extensive discussions over the past year about our monetary policy framework 
and how we might think about ways to provide further accommodation to the economy in the 
face of the ELB.  That reality has unfortunately arrived at our doorstep, and I expect we will be 
faced with considering whether additional measures should be deployed to support the economy 
as it recovers from this historic shock and, if so, how. 
Before discussing the merits of the different policy options, I think the current uncertain 
environment, with the historic amount of accommodation already delivered or in train, does not 
necessarily lead me to believe that further action is required.  It will take some time for the dust 
to settle on the economy and also to judge the effectiveness of the actions that we’ve already 
taken.  However, as part of that uncertainty, I’m also aware that downside risks could 
materialize, causing the economy to deteriorate rapidly once again.  As such, now is the right 
time to have a discussion of our policy options, and I’ll turn to the discussion questions posed in 
the staff memo. 
Our playbook from the Great Recession already includes forward guidance and large-
scale asset purchases.  In that regard, it seems reasonable to consider these tools in conjunction 
with our interest rate policy, although their efficacy was debated then, and I expect it will be 
debated again.  In today’s context, I’m skeptical of the benefits of launching a new LSAP 
program that goes beyond market functioning and aims to provide further accommodation.  
Given the size of the balance sheet and already depressed term premiums, I’m not sure how 
much bang we would get for our buck. 
June 9–10, 2020
34 of 270


 
 
 
Based on our previous experience with balance sheet policy, we know unwinding these 
purchases is difficult, as others have already noted.  Any further additions, as with the increases 
we’ve already taken, stand a fair chance of sticking around for some time, with significant 
operational and political economy implications. 
In the ranking of further policy accommodation, my own leaning is to use more explicit 
forward guidance.  Again, the effectiveness of forward guidance will be limited by the already 
low level of long-term yields, but I found the analysis in the staff memo encouraging.  In fact, 
staff work at the Kansas City Fed also shows that, even in a low-rate environment, date-based 
forward guidance can be very effective.  In particular, their analysis shows sizable effects from 
the Committee’s August 2011 date-based forward guidance compared with its subsequent state-
based guidance adopted in December 2012. 
In terms of yield curve targeting, I’m open to further staff work and discussion of this 
potential policy instrument, although I do have several questions about its use.  First, it seems 
there are many similarities and complementarities between yield curve targeting and date-based 
forward guidance.  Does targeting the yield curve introduce a level of complexity in the conduct 
of a policy that could be accomplished as effectively and more simply with explicit forward 
guidance?  Is it possible to quantify the benefits of adopting yield curve targeting relative to date-
based forward guidance, and do those benefits stem from enhanced credibility?  How should we 
weigh such benefits relative to the additional apparatus required by yield curve targeting? 
Second, yield curve caps are argued to have the advantage of limiting the crowding-out 
of private investments that might otherwise occur with a large increase in government spending.  
However, with this more explicit link between fiscal and monetary policy, issues of central bank 
independence would certainly be prominent.  Depending on how targets or caps are 
June 9–10, 2020
35 of 270


 
 
 
implemented, we’ll need to consider how the use of yield curve control is explained relative to 
the 1951 Accord and how the equivalence of bank reserves and Treasury securities could lead to 
perceptions that we were giving the Treasury control of our balance sheet. 
Finally, I’m mindful that as we intervene in markets and influence prices in a low-for-
long environment, we risk losing valuable sources of market information.  Market signals are 
important, and we smother them at some risk to ourselves and the economy.  As a corollary, I 
don’t think we should take for granted that, once we move so explicitly into a particular market 
segment, we can subsequently depart and expect things to go back to normal.  So forceful an 
intervention as a price target is likely to have lasting effects on the market, even if we do plan to 
eventually exit.  And as a practical matter, with Treasury yields already near record lows, we 
may find we really don’t have much yield to control.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman, please. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I’d also like to thank the staff for their work 
to prepare the memos for today’s meeting and for this discussion.  These memos provided 
excellent research to help inform my understanding of the complex issues and will certainly 
inform our future discussions. 
Consistent with the model simulation results shown in the first memo, available evidence 
suggests that the Committee’s use of explicit forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases 
played a meaningful role in pursuit of our dual mandate following the 2008–09 financial crisis.  
These tools help stimulate spending and employment, in part by lowering the interest rates 
available to many households and businesses. 
I would be open to considering the use of these tools again, should circumstances require 
it, if or when our short-term interest rate decisions are constrained by the effective lower bound.  
June 9–10, 2020
36 of 270


 
 
 
Of the explicit forward guidance approaches discussed in the memo, I prefer outcome-based 
guidance tied to the unemployment rate.  Our past policy actions, including forward guidance, 
helped bring the unemployment rate to a 50-year low in the period before the pandemic.  If we 
do adopt a form of outcome-based forward guidance in the months ahead, I believe that focusing 
on outcomes that we have achieved in the recent past, like bringing the unemployment rate down 
to levels before the pandemic, would help maintain or enhance the credibility and effectiveness 
of our monetary policy. 
With regard to asset prices, I recognize that our previous large-scale asset purchase 
programs also helped support the attainment of our policy goals, but I would be mindful of how 
much further we would need to expand the size of our balance sheet.  Costs are associated with 
the size and composition of our balance sheet, such as increasing our “footprint” in the financial 
markets, and we should weigh these costs against the economic benefits of these programs.  
Even though I don’t think we’re currently constrained in our ability to further expand the balance 
sheet, I do see a higher bar for large-scale asset purchases than for explicit forward guidance. 
Let me conclude with some observations on the second memo.  In our current 
circumstances, with a very low federal funds rate, and with the public not expecting a funds rate 
hike anytime soon, I am skeptical of the role that yield curve control could play in the United 
States.  In addition, as I have noted, I believe this Committee has been able to use explicit 
forward guidance as a credible and effective monetary policy tool.  Therefore, it’s not clear to me 
that there is a need to rely on yield curve caps to reinforce our forward guidance at this time, 
especially because yield curve caps have potential costs, including their effect on the size and 
composition of the balance sheet. 
June 9–10, 2020
37 of 270


 
 
 
Of course, our circumstances could change, and down the road we may find ourselves 
looking for ways to reinforce our forward guidance.  With this in mind, I would be interested in 
learning more about issues related to exiting a cap policy implementation.  I would also be 
interested in further work on how to reconcile capping the shorter end of the curve—which could 
be interpreted as a form of date-based forward guidance—with the types of outcome-based 
forward guidance that were discussed in the first memo.  I look forward to future discussions of 
these issues.  Thank you, Chair Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard, please. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I want to start by joining Chair Powell in expressing my 
anguish at the death of George Floyd and the injustices experienced by many black Americans.  
Along with colleagues across the System, I am committed to combating racism as evidenced in 
our commitment to a diverse and inclusive work environment, our engagement with diverse 
communities across the country, our enforcement of fair lending rules, our support for minority 
depository institutions, our recognition that addressing racial inequities in credit markets is a core 
purpose of the Community Reinvestment Act, and our recognition of the importance of work to 
the dignity of Americans of every race and ethnicity.  We can and must make a difference in the 
work the Congress has entrusted us to do. 
I will now turn to the staff memos.  First of all, let me join others in thanking them for the 
very helpful analysis.  Last Friday’s jobs numbers validate our agreement in the previous 
meeting to watch the data for a few months until activity has passed its lockdown-induced trough 
before shifting from stabilization to accommodation.  With activity resuming somewhat earlier 
than anticipated, we should have a better sense of the tone of the recovery by our September 
meeting.   
June 9–10, 2020
38 of 270


 
 
 
When it is appropriate to define a comprehensive program to provide accommodation, 
that program needs to be informed by the structural features of the economy that the Committee 
emphasized in our long-run strategy discussion as well as the particulars of the COVID-19 crisis.  
These structural features include an equilibrium rate of interest that is well below its historical 
level, an inflation process that exhibits low responsiveness to resource utilization, and underlying 
trend inflation that is consistently below target.  We highlighted the risk that the resulting 
proximity of the policy rate to the lower bound could impart a downward bias to inflation when 
conventional policy space is constrained in responding to a significant disturbance, and the 
resulting experience of below-target inflation could depress inflation expectations and nominal 
rates and further compress conventional policy space.  In these circumstances, the commitment 
to use a more expansive set of policy tools is vital. 
Before the COVID-19 shock, the Committee was converging on an approach that would 
actively employ the full range of tools in responding to significant disturbances, define price 
stability as average inflation of 2 percent, commit to achieving both maximum employment and 
the inflation target, and seek to address shortfalls rather than deviations of employment from its 
maximum.  Although the COVID-19 crisis was not contemplated when we began those 
deliberations, the Committee’s emerging approach to its strategy and tools should serve us well 
in returning the economy to full employment and target inflation. 
In assessing our tools, we are fortunate to have had several years to assess how a variety 
of innovations performed here and abroad in response to the Global Financial Crisis.  The 
memos the staff prepared for today’s meeting as well as for our discussion in August 2018, 
together with the papers prepared for the conference held in Chicago last June, are very helpful. 
June 9–10, 2020
39 of 270


 
 
 
From the earlier policy memos, we learned the Committee’s actions would be more 
powerful if they were conditioned on certain outcomes or dates.  As we learned from experiences 
here and abroad, in the absence of such contingent forward commitments, market participants 
can overreact to economic surprises, leading to excess volatility in interest rates and steepening 
the yield curve prematurely. 
We also learned that markets are sensitive to the joint settings of different policy tools, so 
communications and actions around them need to be deliberate and coherent.  This is particularly 
true as the recovery becomes more entrenched—when tapering purchases and engineering 
balance sheet runoff posed some challenges here and abroad. 
With the benefit of hindsight, it is important that exit should be taken into account ex 
ante. 
The literature suggests we can effectively compensate for the relatively compressed 
amount of conventional policy space relative to that used to combat recessions historically by 
providing a forward commitment that we will refrain from removing accommodation until 
certain conditions have been met.  This can be accomplished through a set of forward 
commitments that are either outcome based or based on dates that are projected to coincide with 
the achievement of those outcomes. 
Simulations in previous staff memos in August 2018 suggest that conditioning forward 
guidance on inflation leads to better economic outcomes than employment on its own.  In view 
of the independent importance placed on shortfalls of employment and deviations of inflation in 
the emerging long-run strategy, and against the backdrop of the persistent undershooting of our 
inflation target, my initial inclination would be to commit to refrain from liftoff until maximum 
employment and 2 percent inflation are achieved. 
June 9–10, 2020
40 of 270


 
 
 
This would be consistent with the view that is emerging from our long-run strategy 
discussions.  Whereas, in past decades, such an approach would have carried a substantial risk of 
an outbreak of inflation to the upside, the structural features of the new normal suggest a lesser 
commitment could pose a material risk of entrenching inflation expectations below target, as we 
learned in the previous episode when liftoff was undertaken on a preemptive basis.  Alongside 
the employment commitment, by stating its intention to refrain from lifting off the lower bound 
until inflation reaches 2 percent, the Committee would demonstrate its commitment to its 
average inflation target, as this would imply support for inflation rising a bit above 2 percent for 
a time following liftoff to compensate for the period of the undershoot. 
Both the literature and experience suggest such forward commitments can suffer from 
credibility challenges associated with their possible time inconsistency.  The forward 
commitments are more powerful in influencing expectations—and, importantly, behavior—the 
more credible they are.  The Committee could ensure the credibility of the forward guidance by 
setting targets for yields at maturities that correspond to the Committee’s proposed achievement 
of the associated objective. 
A key advantage of yield curve caps or targets on the short-to-medium part of the curve is 
that they provide a credible commitment technology.  It is true that market participants currently 
expect rates to remain low through the medium term, but we saw during the previous recovery 
that those expectations can change prematurely as the recovery gathers strength, and this comes 
at considerable cost.  
In addition, yield curve targeting can help bolster inflation expectations by providing an 
important nominal anchor and reducing uncertainty about rates over the medium term.  Such 
June 9–10, 2020
41 of 270


 
 
 
yield curve targets can be seen as a relatively intuitive expansion of the Committee’s 
conventional policy approach of interest rate setting. 
The research suggests the efficacy of asset purchases in the previous recession reflected 
in part—an important part—their signaling about the future path of policy.  It is likely that a 
yield curve targeting policy at the short end could provide a clearer and stronger signal regarding 
the likely horizon of the forward guidance. 
If yield curve targets are implemented effectively, they should, in principle, lead to 
reduced outright purchases, and the resulting securities will be at shorter maturities that can roll 
off sooner.  Any asset purchases made as part of that policy can be allowed to roll off once the 
targets are reached, potentially avoiding the volatility that appeared at several junctures when 
markets tightened prematurely, undercutting the Committee’s intended posture. 
Important design features need to be worked through, as others have noted.  Others have 
highlighted the possible choice between targets and target ranges.  Moreover, like forward 
guidance, yield curve targeting can be either outcome or date based.  In either case, the horizon 
at which yields are initially targeted necessarily provides information on the date at which the 
Committee expects the outcomes to be achieved.  As such, decisions about whether to extend or 
shorten the targeted horizon provide ongoing information about the Committee’s judgments 
regarding the horizon over which forward-guidance commitments are likely to be achieved, 
possibly increasing the clarity of the Committee’s communications. 
Policy targeted at the short-to-medium part of the yield curve, in combination with 
forward guidance, hasn’t been tested in the U.S. context, and the Committee has not been given 
commensurate analysis of such policies relative to asset purchases and forward guidance over the 
June 9–10, 2020
42 of 270


 
 
 
past few years.  It will be very important to see further analysis of the design and implementation 
of such a policy, as well as analysis of the potential economic and financial effects. 
In addition, to ensure that the forward trajectory of the Committee’s expected policy rate 
path transmits effectively to the long-term rates that influence households’ housing investment 
decisions, these actions can be augmented with asset purchases at the longer end of the yield 
curve.  In contrast to the liquidity-easing asset purchases that we’ve undertaken all along the 
yield curve so far, a move to providing accommodation via quantitative easing would shift to 
targeting purchases at the long end.  By pinning down the short-to-medium-term end of the yield 
curve, all else being equal, the combination of forward guidance and reinforcing yield curve 
target ranges should transmit to the back end of the curve, thereby potentially reducing the 
magnitude of the requisite purchases. 
The staff memos presented in August 2018 and October 2018 indicate that the 
effectiveness of asset purchases is likely to depend on whether they are open ended, and 
presumably designed to achieve employment or inflation objectives, or at a fixed pace, 
presumably tied to some calendar guidance.  Market expectations should inform our assessments, 
but it would also be helpful to see analysis of the level and composition of asset purchases 
calibrated to the achievement of the particular objectives we set as part of a comprehensive 
three-legged approach to supporting the recovery.  And it would also be helpful to see further 
analysis about how exit can be undertaken with less market volatility than was experienced over 
the past several years. 
I appreciate the staff’s analysis of yield curve approaches adopted historically in the 
United States as well as currently in Japan and Australia.  The historical experience in the United 
States underscores the importance of tying our policy approach clearly to the objectives set for us 
June 9–10, 2020
43 of 270


 
 
 
by the Congress to differentiate it from monetary financing.  And this is true for asset purchases 
no less than for yield curve targeting. 
I look forward to further analysis on the design and implementation of the yield curve 
targets; the appropriate size, composition and objectives of asset purchases; and the selection of 
outcomes to condition the forward guidance on liftoff from the lower bound.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles, please. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me just note at the outset that the spring 
weather in the Rocky Mountains is variable and chilly, so the fire is not for the ineffable 
ambience, or at least not merely for the ambience.  It’s about 40 degrees outside. 
I want to thank the staff as well for their comprehensive and well-elucidated discussion of 
these topics and particularly to echo President George’s acknowledgement that the memos are 
not only, as usual, excellent, but produced under difficult personal circumstances and are very 
much appreciated. 
We now have more than a decade of experience using forward guidance and large-scale 
asset purchases when the federal funds rate is at the effective lower bound and experience with 
transitioning from the effective lower bound.  I think this memo prepared by the staff shows that 
some combination of these tools can continue to serve us well as we navigate through the 
aftermath of the current crisis.  The key to that effectiveness is our credibility in making forward-
looking statements about the path of interest rates.  Our current policy stance is that we’ll 
maintain the current target range until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent 
events and is on track to achieve our dual mandate. 
June 9–10, 2020
44 of 270


 
 
 
We’re also committed to purchasing Treasury and agency securities in such quantities as 
needed to support smooth market functioning.  As a result, the Treasury yield curve shows 
interest rates at 26 basis points or lower all the way out to three years, at least as of Friday.  It’s 
hard to imagine a more effective transmission of our desired policy rate path.  And I agree with 
President Bullard and others who have acknowledged that we’re benefiting from the credibility 
of forward guidance that was created during the 2008–16 era. 
Another consideration is whether those two tools alone are sufficient to achieve our 
employment and inflation goals in an acceptable amount of time.  The staff’s baseline 
projections show extremely rapid growth in 2021, growth continues well above trend in 2022, 
and as a result, unemployment decreases by the end of 2022 to a level that’s within the range of 
estimates of NAIRU, and inflation is back to 1.8 percent. 
The analysis in the memo shows that if we want a faster recovery, a combination of 
explicitly establishing an asset purchase program roughly in line with the 2012–14 LSAP 
program and a commitment to maintain the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound until 
inflation reaches 2 percent would move unemployment to about 4.5 percent early in 2022. 
Now, that may create a concern that we wouldn’t meet our employment mandate for two 
years, but we have experienced an unprecedented shock.  And with the costs and uncertainties 
associated with monetary policy at the lower bound, an even more aggressive LSAP or a new, 
untested policy may have unintended consequences.  And, as we often remind folks, monetary 
policy can’t always do all of the work.  We need further actions on other fronts, including fiscal 
policy, if a faster recovery is desired. 
The second memo does an excellent job of explaining the experience of yield curve 
targeting by other central banks.  I’m very supportive of our efforts to study carefully potential 
June 9–10, 2020
45 of 270


 
 
 
alternative policies at the effective lower bound, especially in light of the possibility of 
prolonged high unemployment and inflation below our target.  But I share the concerns that 
many have expressed with the approach.  Most important, the commitment to purchase as much 
Treasury issuance as is necessary to defend the target blurs the lines between monetary and fiscal 
policy, thereby at least confusing and possibly risking our reputation for independence.  And on 
that point, I think the memo made very clear that that’s not just a hypothetical risk.  The 
description of the negotiations between the Treasury as we tried to extricate ourselves from the 
World War II commitments in the late 1940s made it clear that Federal Reserve independence 
was compromised at that time. 
In light of the host of other concerns about the strategy, including giving up control of the 
size of our balance sheet, I think we’d have to perceive significant potential marginal benefits to 
adopt this tool.  Our ability to exert downward pressure on both short- and longer-term rates 
effectively through forward guidance and LSAPs and control rates on the way up through 
increases in the federal funds rate makes that a high hurdle—potentially not insurmountable.   
As many have commented, yield curve targeting seems principally a reinforcement for 
forward guidance.  Like President Harker and a number of others have commented, it’s not clear 
to me that our forward guidance needs reinforcement, certainly at this time.  You could imagine 
that reinforcement might be helpful if we expected an extremely long period of accommodation, 
such as the one considered in the first memo under the second wave or “W” scenario, in which 
the optimal policy in one of the simulations was to hold the federal funds rate at the effective 
lower bound through 2030.  But, again, I think that that’s a helpful heuristic analysis but 
certainly not an expectation currently.  
June 9–10, 2020
46 of 270


 
 
 
I think our experience to date shows that as long as we maintain our credibility and 
financial markets are functioning, forward guidance acts forcefully on short- and medium-term 
interest rates, and that LSAPs exert significant downward pressure on term premiums of longer-
term debt.  Certainly, the current situation has us in an economic hole that’s larger than we have 
experienced before, so it’s prudent to be considering additional tools in case they’re necessary.  
But I return to a point I’ve made a number of times over our discussion of monetary policy 
frameworks, which is that I think we shouldn’t focus excessively on the constraints imposed by 
the effective lower bound but, rather, to continue to communicate our belief in the effectiveness 
of the tools that we’ve employed in this situation. 
In conclusion, my current assumption is that forward guidance should remain our primary 
tool, backed up by LSAPs as conditions warrant.  That said, I look forward to the staff’s next 
update on yield curve targeting and continuing to study the potential for this tool to assist us in 
achieving our mandate under some circumstances.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly.  
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me start by seconding Governor Brainard’s 
remarks about the events of late and also say thank you, Mr. Chair, for your opening remarks at 
our meeting about our commitment as an institution to standing against racism and injustice and 
doing everything in our power to combat them.  I really applaud your willingness to speak 
tomorrow at the press conference about these issues.  I also want to second President George’s 
remarks and thank the staff for preparing these memos and consistently delivering high-quality 
analysis so that we can do our best work to discuss these issues. 
So the topic today, of course, is forward-guidance, QE, and yield curve control.  And as 
Governor Clarida started us off this morning, even in the most optimistic virus scenarios, it 
June 9–10, 2020
47 of 270


 
 
 
seems clear that the economy will need additional support beyond our emergency actions we’ve 
already taken to return to the two goals of full employment and 2 percent inflation.  And I see 
this conversation as a first step in ensuring we are prepared to provide this support in a timely 
manner. 
As we learned from the financial crisis, the foundation of additional accommodation at 
the effective lower bound is clear policy guidance:  telling market participants, businesses, and 
households what to expect so that they can make informed decisions about how to invest and 
spend.  And at present, I see this guidance occurring along three dimensions. 
First, the completion of our policy framework review.  I know this is for another meeting, 
but like Governor Clarida and President Evans and others have noted, I see the framework 
review as the basic support for the other things that we’re doing.  If we reinforce our 
commitment to a symmetric 2 percent inflation objective, the public will naturally incorporate 
this into their expectations and automatically help stabilize inflation around our target—doing 
part of the work for us, if you will.  As I’ve mentioned in previous discussions, I see some form 
of average inflation targeting as the most direct and simple way to reinforce this commitment 
because it automatically builds in some sense that we are overshooting.  Importantly, if I think 
about it through this lens, this would already, if we had it in place, be generating additional 
stimulus to the economy today.  But whatever form we decide to take, I think just reinforcing our 
objective is really necessary.  It’s the foundational support. 
The second thing we learned from the work in the financial crisis is that once we’re clear 
about our objectives, we have this tool of detailed and specific forward guidance about the funds 
rate.  I think state-based thresholds really worked well in that way.  They’re really effective at 
lowering interest rates along the yield curve and, importantly, reducing uncertainty about our 
June 9–10, 2020
48 of 270


 
 
 
plans.  And we will likely need this type of specific guidance—state-based would be my 
preference—if we were to firmly pin down expectations about the future path of the funds rate.  
As Governor Brainard mentioned, although markets currently expect a long spell at the ELB, 
history has taught us that market expectations can move, especially when financial conditions—
in particular, the stock market—are good, when there’s this division between the real economy 
and the financial economy.  In these cases, detailed forward guidance provides clarity that the 
adjustments to the funds rate will depend on milestones toward our dual-mandate goal rather 
than the evolution in equity prices or financial conditions more generally. 
The third element of our guidance has historically been the role of asset purchases, and 
here we have learned that effectively communicating our intentions about asset purchases can 
reduce the ultimate amount we need to buy, because it does set expectations.  In recent months, 
we have focused on market functioning as the role that asset purchases are playing, but they are 
also likely providing crucial macroeconomic stimulus, more so as financial conditions improve.  
So I would welcome, personally, a staff memo that just starts telling us about how much stimulus 
we think the balance sheet is currently providing and how much more stimulus is going to be 
necessary if we are to achieve our dual-mandate goals—similar in the type to the memos we’ve 
already seen. 
Now, finally, with regard to yield curve control, I think I echo the remarks of others that 
this leaves me with more questions than answers at this point.  So I don’t have complete 
confidence that we fully understand what implementation would look like and what the effects 
would be in the United States.  That said, I think yield curve control at the short end can 
complement our funds rate guidance and provide useful reinforcement on interest rate 
expectations.  However, if I read the memos correctly and the research that accompanies them, 
June 9–10, 2020
49 of 270


 
 
 
the need for capping shorter-term yields diminishes if we have clear and credible forward 
guidance.  I am actually really unsure about controlling long-term yields with yield curve 
control.  There I would need to see much more analysis before being confident that we could 
embark on that policy successfully for so many of the reasons people have mentioned, including 
exit, et cetera.  But let me name a couple of others. 
Although there are potential benefits associated with this, and they were spelled out 
clearly in the memo, losing control over the size of our balance sheet seems a major concern.  If 
we’re going to target prices, we’ll lose control of quantities, and those are issues that we’ve 
historically struggled with, about the size of the balance sheet and the “optics” of that.  So I 
worry, in addition to all the real reasons we might struggle with that, how markets would react.  
Would they really think that we’re going to do everything that—we’re going to let quantity go 
just to target price?  So I don’t know how effective the policy would be. 
In addition, uncertain estimates of r*—we talked about short-run r* earlier, but we don’t 
have real confidence in the value of long-run r* and how it’s being affected.  If we have r* 
wrong, we run the risk of targeting long-term yields at a level that is incompatible with our 
inflation goal and only recognizing that as things evolve. 
Finally, I’ll say that I am skeptical about the applicability of the Japanese experience.  I 
mean, it was useful to see it in a memo, but if I understand what they were trying to do, the BOJ 
was trying to boost 10-year yields and attain a positive yield curve slope.  So we would 
presumably be trying to lower rates, and this would not necessarily have the same outcome in 
terms of how much purchases we would then not have to make because of yield curve control. 
So if you put all of this together, I see deploying the framework review—forward 
guidance of the specific type we’ve used in the past and our asset purchases—as our first tool.  
June 9–10, 2020
50 of 270


 
 
 
But as someone said earlier, “Never say never.”  So I think it’s really useful that we evaluate this 
extra tool of yield curve control.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester, please. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I also want to thank the staff for the work on the 
new memos prepared for this meeting, but also for distributing the two earlier memos on the 
Federal Reserve’s experience of yield caps during and after World War II.  I think this set of 
memos is a good illustration of what I believe is a very productive two-pronged approach to 
policy considerations—using our models to do in-depth analyses of potential policy actions 
across various scenarios and then augmenting that work with an evaluation of historical or 
current applications of the actions in the real world, a place that’s more complicated than our 
models can capture. 
Now, as part of the framework review, we discussed policy tools last October, and my 
views haven’t really changed since then despite the different economic circumstances we find 
ourselves in at this time.  During the Great Recession and its aftermath, we relied on forward 
guidance about the future path of interest rates and asset purchases to add policy 
accommodation.  And I continue to view these as the tools to use to add further accommodation 
when the funds rate is at the effective lower bound. 
The Fed’s balance sheet holdings of assets have risen significantly since the start of the 
pandemic, at the end of May they were about 36 percent of GDP, and the staff projects they will 
rise to around 40 percent later this year.  So while those are records, there’s still space to 
continue asset purchases in support of the recovery.  At the same time, we do need to be realistic 
about the limits of our tools, especially in an environment in which longer-term bond yields are 
even lower than they were when we last considered LSAPs. 
June 9–10, 2020
51 of 270


 
 
 
Because both forward guidance and asset purchases work through their effects on 
expectations, clear communications are central to their efficacy.  I know I have spoken about 
communications at many meetings before this, but I really think that they are central to the way 
these tools work.  I do believe that qualitative, date-based, and outcome-based formulations can 
all work so long as we communicate what we’re doing, why we’re doing it, and that we’re going 
to review and extend the guidance as necessary depending on the evolution of the economy. 
Now, when we invoke any tool, we should think seriously about what our exit strategy 
will be.  The threshold formulation of forward guidance has some appeal because it links the 
guidance to economic conditions, but that still leaves open the question of what the Committee 
will do once the thresholds are reached.  In our models, the post-liftoff policy reaction function 
significantly affects the efficacy of the forward guidance.  And, of course, in our models we are 
using rules to guide those policies, post-liftoff. 
I do think it’s interesting that we are willing to make what could be very long-term 
commitments when the funds rate is at zero, but we’re much less willing to offer much, if any, 
specificity about how policy will react once the funds rate lifts off from the effective lower 
bound.  And as others have mentioned, the exit from yield curve control is also going to be 
complicated. 
Now, there’s this tradeoff between credibility and commitment that should be considered 
in choosing the formulation of these tools.  Under some of the simulations, it takes a very long 
time to reach the outcome threshold set out in the forward guidance, making this tradeoff more 
salient.  And in models, a strong commitment to the forward guidance makes it more effective.  
But in the real world, other considerations, like financial stability concerns, may arise when 
interest rates are held very low for a long time, and they might come in conflict with medium-run 
June 9–10, 2020
52 of 270


 
 
 
macroeconomic goals.  In such a case, if policymakers need to deviate from their own forward 
guidance, this will undermine their credibility—which, in turn, could limit the effectiveness of 
forward guidance used in the future. 
Recognizing this type of tradeoff, I would consider financial stability escape clauses in 
threshold forward guidance, especially when the expected time horizon for reaching the goals in 
the guidance is long, even though such clauses may be interpreted as making a weaker 
commitment.  The Bank of England’s use of financial stability escape clauses in their monetary 
policy forward guidance in 2013 provides a useful example. 
Regarding yield curve control, I am interested in following and learning from the Reserve 
Bank of Australia experience with their yield targeted at a three-year maturity.  However, the 
background articles discussing the Fed’s experience during and after World War II with yield 
curve caps do give me some pause.  And I would like to see more analysis to better understand 
whether the benefits would outweigh the costs. 
Our experience in the 1940s and ’50s suggests three questions I would like to see 
answered.  First, how would yield curve control affect the size and maturity composition of our 
balance sheet, and how would it interact with our LSAP tool?  Second, what exit strategy from 
yield caps would minimize disruptions in the markets?  And, third, how would we handle the 
relationship with the Treasury and ensure that the independence of monetary policy is not put at 
risk?  The answer to each of these questions would help inform choices about the formulation of 
the tool—for example, caps versus targets, shorter versus longer maturities, and, ultimately, our 
assessment of the benefits versus the costs. 
Now, as others have said, the good news is that there is time to analyze these issues.  The 
public, including market participants, understands our current forward guidance that interest 
June 9–10, 2020
53 of 270


 
 
 
rates will remain low for quite some time, and tomorrow’s SEP release will reinforce that 
guidance.  Yields are low across the curve, so there doesn’t appear to be a compelling need to 
reinforce our forward guidance at this point.  Nonetheless, we have seen that conditions can 
change rapidly.  So undertaking the analysis now to see if this tool should be added to our toolkit 
and how it should be formulated seems prudent. 
One final point.  The issue of the independence of monetary policy looms large whenever 
we take unprecedented actions as we are doing today with our facilities.  As President Rosengren 
has pointed out in past discussions, some of the assets that we will be taking on under our Main 
Street facility may result in losses.  This does not mean that setting up the facility was the wrong 
thing to do, but it does suggest that we should think now of ways to ensure that if the assets do 
experience losses, this does not compromise our ability to act in future emergency situations or 
to set monetary policy independently. 
On March 23, 2009, in the aftermath of some of the actions that the Fed took to address 
the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury released a joint public statement 
clarifying their common understanding of the Fed’s role.  Four points of agreement were 
outlined.  One, in unusual and exigent circumstances, the Treasury and the Federal Reserve 
would cooperate in improving the functioning of credit markets and fostering financial stability.  
Two, the Fed would avoid credit risk and credit allocation.  Three, notwithstanding the actions 
taken in pursuit of financial stability, monetary stability had to be preserved.  And, four, the 
Federal Reserve and the Treasury would work with the Congress to develop a comprehensive 
resolution regime for systemically critical financial institutions. 
This statement went on to say that in the longer term, the Treasury would seek to remove 
from the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet the Maiden Lane facilities that the Fed set up to 
June 9–10, 2020
54 of 270


 
 
 
stabilize critical financial institutions.  Of course, that never happened.  Nonetheless, at an 
appropriate time, the Chair may want to discuss with the Treasury a similar approach to the 
assets that we are taking on at today’s facilities, set up in the unusual and exigent circumstances 
of the pandemic.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari, please. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me start by adding my acknowledgement 
of the tragic death of George Floyd in Minneapolis a couple of weeks ago.  It’s obviously 
affected people all around the country—indeed, around the world—but nowhere more than here 
in Minneapolis where the tragedy took place.  What was most shocking for me watching the 
video was not only that he was killed helplessly by police, but that they knew they were 
surrounded by witnesses, they knew they were being videotaped, and they never hesitated.  They 
never blinked.  It was as though they didn’t think they were doing anything wrong, because it 
was their own training that taught them to bring deadly force against African American men.  I 
am just grateful that we have technology today that we can actually capture these things and 
begin to open our eyes to what’s taking place.  And so I applaud you, Mr. Chair, for speaking out 
tomorrow at your press conference, and I am also proud of the Federal Reserve and all of our 
institutions and our commitment to diversity and inclusion. 
I’ll turn now to the memos.  I do think that these tools that were described are all 
useful—forward guidance, yield curve control, and LSAPs—and I think they could be, together, 
a very powerful package, which I’ll describe in a moment. 
Let me start by just echoing something that I asked about earlier, which is, are we in fact 
providing accommodation today?  I could argue, we might not be.  Despite all of our actions, if 
short-run r* has fallen by as much as we think it has, we may well be in a contractionary policy 
June 9–10, 2020
55 of 270


 
 
 
stance today.  Which is hard to get our head around, but that might just be the reality of a short-
run r* and an effective lower bound—that we’re not providing any or much accommodation 
today.  And so looking for ways to try to do more, I do think, is a useful exercise. 
 I look at our forward guidance today, and I think it is quite weak.  This isn’t a criticism, 
it’s just—“The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the 
economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum-employment and 
price-stability goals.”  That’s a pretty soft commitment to keeping the federal funds rate at the 
effective lower bound, because anything could happen when all of a sudden we think we’re on 
track to achieve it.   
And if we look at our liftoff in the previous recovery, I would argue that we lifted off 
prematurely.  We thought there was less slack in the labor market than there was, and we lifted 
off.  Even if you look at the SEP, which I have been kind of a frequent critic of, the SEP was 
designed to be a tool of accommodative forward guidance.  It was, in fact, a tool of 
contractionary forward guidance by always showing dots going up much faster than markets 
expected.  So the forward guidance that we delivered in the recovery was actually providing a 
contractionary stance, not an accommodative stance.  I think we would be well served by really 
strengthening our forward guidance today, to keep the federal funds rate at the effective lower 
bound. 
Now, I’m in favor of state-based forward guidance, so tie it to achieving our inflation 
goals.  So, for example, if we said core PCE inflation would have to be at 2 percent for at least a 
year, as an example, I think that that could be powerful forward guidance, that we’re not going to 
raise rates until we actually achieve that inflation target.  But I think we could go beyond that.  I 
think we could tie all three of these tools to the same state-based goal of core PCE being at 2 
June 9–10, 2020
56 of 270


 
 
 
percent for at least a year—so, keep the federal funds rate at the ELB until we achieve that.  We 
could also tie yield curve control to the same goal.  So imagine if we said we’re going to cap 
two-year yields wherever they are today, and we’re going to keep that cap until that inflation 
threshold has been met, and then we would begin an automatic rolloff. 
In Ben Bernanke’s blog a few years ago, he talked about a way to do yield curve control 
so you wouldn’t have this binary feature that, all of a sudden, you’d be buying up the whole 
market.  There would be a natural rolloff for the duration for the two years.  So we say we’re not 
going to start the rolloff of the two-year cap until we actually achieve our inflation target, and 
then the yield curve control naturally rolls off over the following two years.  And then, third, we 
could tie LSAPs to the same threshold, which is, we commit to buying X billions of dollars of 
Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities per month, and we’re going to keep buying them per 
month until we actually achieve 2 percent inflation for that 12-month period. 
There are a lot of ways you could design this.  My point is that the federal funds rate, a 
two-year or three-year yield curve control, and the LSAPs could all be put together in a very 
tight package that is all anchored on achieving the same inflation goal. 
So what would this achieve?  I think it would provide some accommodation today, 
primarily through boosting inflation expectations somewhat today, and I think that would be 
useful.  But I think even more powerful is that this would be a way of defending our inflation 
target.  Let’s not forget that we missed on our inflation target for 10 years before COVID-19 
came along.  And now we are at even greater risk of missing our inflation target as this pandemic 
winds its way through society.  And so, to me, doing all we can to defend the seriousness of our 
inflation target, and that we’re going to do whatever we can to try to achieve it, is, in and of 
June 9–10, 2020
57 of 270


 
 
 
itself, a useful exercise beyond the fact that it would be providing some additional stimulus 
today.  
Now, what’s the downside of this?  The downside is that we do these three things, this 
three-part package, to defend our inflation target, and we nonetheless don’t hit our inflation 
target.  Well, I would argue, it is better to try and then fail than to not try and then fail.  And if 
we try, we might actually succeed in defending our inflation target.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams, please. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The memos and presentations 
provide a good foundation for thinking about how to best use our policy tools to achieve our 
maximum-employment and price-stability goals.  And, like others, I’d like to thank the staff not 
just on these memos, but all the staff work and analysis that’s been taking place over the past few 
months to help us think through these extraordinary circumstances we’re in, recognizing the 
challenges that people are facing working from home and everything around COVID-19.  I’d 
also like to thank the staff in particular for sending the three questions—which, unfortunately, I 
seem to have mislaid. 
I’ll turn now to the topic.  I would like to start with what a bunch of other people 
mentioned already, which is the framework.  I actually didn’t have this written down as my 
response, but I think it’s an excellent point.  As we think about the policy tools and what we do 
to try to get the economy back to full strength, the framework is going to be really important and 
the consensus statement that articulates our goals of eliminating shortfalls from maximum 
employment and getting average 2 percent inflation.  Having that strategic overlay of what 
“good” looks like, what we’re trying to achieve, will really, I think, be powerful, both in terms of 
June 9–10, 2020
58 of 270


 
 
 
the effectiveness of our actions and shaping our communications over the next several years.  So 
I do think that’s a key component of all of this. 
Now, we did have a healthy discussion of our toolkit just last year.  And I know that 
seems like eons ago, but some conclusions from those discussions still hold.  I think the most 
important thing is that we do have effective tools, in terms of forward guidance and asset 
purchases, to provide support for the economy when the funds rate is constrained at the effective 
lower bound.  I think the analysis, the research, and the experience of the past decade support 
that conclusion. 
Yield curve control does add a new, additional element to the mix.  In that regard, the 
memo on limited experience with yield curve control was informative, and I agree with everyone 
that we need to see more analysis and to understand yield curve control before drawing any 
policy conclusions from that.  But I’m assured that that will be forthcoming. 
In thinking about deploying our tools to their maximum effect, I start with the question—
which is actually, I think, exactly what President Bostic asked about an hour ago—that is, what’s 
the problem we’re trying to solve?  Based on my forecast, it will be appropriate to provide 
significant policy support to the economy, including having the funds rate at the ELB for many 
years.  And given that expectation, which I think is consistent with what we’ve seen in the SEP 
projections that we prepared for this meeting, I think FOMC communications and actions should 
really be aimed at accomplishing three things—again, consistent, I think, with some of the 
comments heard earlier.  But I’ll just go through them quickly. 
The first is to align market expectations of the baseline policy path with those of the 
FOMC.  So that’s basically having a good alignment between how we’re viewing our policy and 
what the markets are expecting, just for financial conditions being supportive of growth. 
June 9–10, 2020
59 of 270


 
 
 
The second is to align market understanding of our reaction function to changing 
information with our own view of the reaction function.  And I think that’s particularly important 
when you’re at the effective lower bound, because you’re not actually moving the policy 
instrument directly, but you want the market participants and the public to understand how you’ll 
change when the conditions change.  I think there’s some important benefits of that.  One is that 
it reduces uncertainty and potential confusion.  And the other thing that’s important is, there’s a 
lot of uncertainty out there.  Obviously, we are in an extraordinary time right now.  Market 
participants and the public understand that if there’s a severe negative shock, or we get a second 
wave, or some other scenario, we will react, we will add additional accommodation, we will do 
whatever is appropriate.  And that could be a powerful mitigant, in terms of tail risks and adding 
confidence. 
And the third is to reinforce the commitment to deliver on the longer-run goals of 
eliminating the shortfalls from maximum employment and achieving inflation that averages 
2 percent over time. 
And so I think that those are the three things that we really should be focused on, 
especially with the thinking about forward guidance. 
Now, I do think I agree with everyone that experience shows that forward guidance in its 
different forms can support these goals.  It also teaches us that market expectations can become 
unmoored from our own and that the public can misunderstand our intentions, and that makes 
clear and unequivocal communication essential. 
And I do worry a bit that there’s some complacency around where financial conditions 
are now and where market expectations are now.  A couple of weeks ago, I was preparing for 
this meeting.  And I was going to say, “Well, market expectations look pretty good, and they’re 
June 9–10, 2020
60 of 270


 
 
 
at about kind of what I think many of us think.”  But what we’ve watched happen in the past 
couple weeks, and especially on Friday, is that market expectations of the future path of the 
funds rate, and two- and three-year yields, can actually move quite a bit.  And that can perhaps 
inadvertently tighten financial conditions in a way that we wouldn’t actually want. 
And the other is that market expectations are currently basically founded on a belief that 
we are going to take further actions of some kind over the next couple of meetings.  I think 
President Kashkari and maybe others have commented that our forward guidance right now is 
just a placeholder.  It’s something that was put in place because the pandemic was just starting, 
and we were still trying to understand its full effect.  But out there in the markets, there’s clearly 
an expectation that we’re going to continue to carry through with bringing very strong support 
for the economy.  And if we were to just say, “Well, market expectations are good, we don’t 
need to do that much,” I think that would undermine that market expectation, and we would see 
financial conditions potentially tighten in response to that.  So, again, you can’t take those as 
given. 
In terms of the balance sheet, I see two roles that it can play.  The first is, I think, 
potentially in supporting or reinforcing the commitment to keep interest rates low for quite some 
time through yield curve control.  Just thinking of a two-to-three-year forecast horizon, which we 
typically talk about in monetary policy, yield curve control could be useful there.  The devil is in 
the details, but, conceptually, this could provide a very clear signal to the public that we mean 
business when it comes to holding the line on rates.  But like I already said, we need a lot more 
analysis on that before coming to conclusions. 
The second is LSAPs aimed at lowering term premiums in MBS and longer-maturity 
Treasury securities.  These, again, have proven a useful supplement to forward guidance in 
June 9–10, 2020
61 of 270


 
 
 
fostering accommodative financial conditions.  And, importantly, they get directly at key parts of 
the monetary transmission mechanism.  You think about mortgage rates, which are a critical part 
of how monetary policy affects spending.  You think about the 5-to-10-year Treasury part of the 
curve.  Those are the rates that affect costs of business investments, costs of purchases of 
consumer durables, and more generally affect financial conditions in other asset markets and 
foreign exchange markets.  So although thinking about policy expectations over the next couple 
of years is important and critical, asset purchases can have a sizable effect on financial 
conditions more broadly as well. 
So like we’ve always said, I believe we should be using all of our tools in combination as 
appropriate to support achieving our goals.  I think the biggest challenge, which we’ve all 
discussed, is how to do this in an effective and clear package of communication—how we are 
using our tools, how our use of the tools will evolve, and how they’ll interact. 
I wanted to pick up on something President Kashkari said, because I’m going to say 
basically the same thing in terms of the principle.  And that is, we really do need to think about a 
way to have a package of policy tools that we communicate as a package.  Right now, I think it’d 
be pretty easy to say, “Here’s what we’re thinking about monetary policy—it may be well 
positioned for the fall of 2020.”  But we obviously need to think ahead and guide expectations on 
how we’ll adjust the stance of policy over time as the economic outlook evolves.  And here I will 
chime in in support of what many people have said—that outcome-based approaches that are 
linked explicitly to our longer-term policy goals could be useful in this regard. 
Now, one thing I do want to bring back to memory is the challenge associated with 
having multiple thresholds at play at once.  We did do multiple thresholds back with the funds 
rate in QE3.  That did prove to be a source of some confusion as we were ending the QE3 
June 9–10, 2020
62 of 270


 
 
 
program, but were still keeping the funds rate at zero, intending to do that for quite some time.  I 
think that confusion may have contributed importantly to the market turmoil that we saw then.  
But more importantly, it just shows you the challenge of having several tools in play and having 
them described in different ways. 
So I do think it would be really useful, as we think about this over the next couple of 
months, to really think about what President Kashkari said.  Can we come up with a way of 
describing how we’re using all the tools—whether it’s asset purchases, forward guidance, and 
perhaps yield curve control—that’s linked explicitly to our longer-run goals that we will be, it’s 
hoped, articulating in our new framework?  And then, of course, the actual evolution of the 
specific tools over time will follow as appropriate, but really try to have a nice, clean framework 
around that.  
That’s, I think, harder to do than to say, because I know we’ve been thinking about this at 
the New York Fed, so I think we should really use the time between now and whenever the 
appropriate time is to make a policy announcement to really think through that, not only in terms 
of what it would be like in September or sometime like that, but also how that would evolve in 
2021, 2022 as the economy, we hope, improves or other shocks happen that were unanticipated.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks for a really interesting set of comments.  I’ll 
also join others in thanking the staff for those memos, which superbly set the table for a 
thoughtful discussion. 
We’re seeing some initial stages of the return to work, but it seems likely that the pace of 
recovery will be constrained by ongoing distancing restrictions, business and household caution, 
and labor market frictions and fragility triggered by the upheaval and by the threat of the virus 
June 9–10, 2020
63 of 270


 
 
 
resurging.  While happier outcomes would be welcome, I think our main focus must be on how 
to promote and sustain highly accommodative financial conditions during a recovery that is 
likely to prove halting and protracted. 
Policy effectiveness demands—and the public deserves—our best efforts to communicate 
how we intend to use our policy tools, which is a big set right now, including federal funds rate 
guidance, potentially short-term yield curve control, asset purchases, and a wide range of 13(3) 
facilities.  With markets seemingly sending the all-clear one day but likely poised to reflect 
despair on others soon enough, the main message I think we need to convey is the steadiness of 
our belief that the economy is likely to need support for highly accommodative monetary policy 
for some time and our commitment to using all of our tools to provide that support. 
Now, today the public does seem to find our commitment credible, as many have noted.  
But in coming months, it will likely be appropriate to provide more specific forward guidance on 
the federal funds rate as well as to clarify our plans for the purpose and parameters of our asset 
purchase programs.  The market is not carefully scrutinizing the language that President 
Kashkari pointed out, but instead is seeing us as committed, and this is a very important thing.  I 
would even add that this is a case in which the SEP will actually help.  Let the record show that 
the SEP, the dot plot, will actually help, I think, because it shows that we mean at least through 
the end of 2022 is appropriate monetary policy in our judgments.  But I do think the time is 
coming when we will have to do and will want to do what a number of you have suggested, 
which is to put together a package that links together all of our tools in a smart way that 
underscores that commitment. 
I’ll start with forward guidance.  As our discussions reflect, we’re going to have a range 
of plausible options there, and I do think it’s appropriate to keep our minds open now as to 
June 9–10, 2020
64 of 270


 
 
 
exactly where that will come in.  So, for me, there is appeal in the inclusion of a commitment to 
keep policy at the effective lower bound until a particular rate of inflation is achieved. 
Now, those are deliberately vague words.  I do think that we will come to agreement soon 
on the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, and that will clarify where 
we’re going with that.  I think it’s important that we do that soon, and that it be done in 
conjunction with or perhaps immediately before we do clarify what we’re thinking. 
I think we should state our intentions broadly to provide policy support in terms that 
we’re confident will be durable and will put us on track to meet our objectives.  As an example, 
we could say that we’ll maintain highly accommodative financial conditions with the funds rate 
at its current level, so long as this is consistent with sustainably minimizing shortfalls from 
maximum employment and with modest inflation fluctuations centered on 2 percent over time.  
Thus, policy will remain highly accommodative until we see excesses that threaten maximum 
employment or stable, on-target inflation.  I think some statement of this nature would be an 
accurate description of our intentions and one that is clearly expressed, in terms of our goals, in a 
way that does not depend too much on particular views of the economic structure. 
Now, the way I have put it, the statement of our intentions would apply to all of our 
efforts to promote accommodative conditions, leaving open the mix of tools such as those in our 
questions for discussion.  But before I turn to LSAPs in a minute and yield curve control, I also 
want to note that the 13(3) facilities are also part of this mix.  Indeed, if exigencies were to 
intensify, adjusting those facilities with the consent and support of the Treasury could be among 
the most potent tools that we have. 
I’ll turn for a minute to asset purchases with the purpose of putting downward pressure 
on longer-term yields—traditional QE.  Although our understanding is far from complete, I do 
June 9–10, 2020
65 of 270


 
 
 
believe that these purchases can promote accommodative conditions.  In fact, I believe it today.  
FOMC purchases and the expectation that they’ll continue are holding down yields, despite last 
week’s increases.  A recent rise in term yields could be in part due to a smaller perceived need 
for LSAPs. 
As a number of you have pointed out, the fall in the neutral rate of interest and in term 
premiums present policy space limitations that were largely absent from the QE discussions in 
the wake of the Global Financial Crisis.  During the QE1 and QE2 periods, the 10-year yield was 
fluctuating between 2 and 4 percent, and the term premium was clearly positive.  By QE3, the 
10-year yield was a bit below 2 percent, and the term premium was, by standard measures, 
negative at the outset but positive, on average, during the program.  Now, until last week—and 
some of this was retraced this morning, but—the 10-year yield had been under 70 basis points, 
and estimates of the term premium were approaching minus 100 basis points. 
Under those conditions, it is not clear to me—it’s never been clear to me—that driving 
the term premium even more deeply lower would have the same net benefits that we attribute to 
earlier QE.  As we made clear in the memo, the QE simulations largely skirt this difficult 
question.  But the QE in the simulations offsets what would otherwise have been a steady rise in 
term premiums caused by outsized Treasury issuance.  In short, the QE helped maintain 
accommodative financial conditions in what would have been a financial tightening otherwise.  
And the rise in the 10-year in the latter part of last year would, of course, support this view of 
rising term premiums. 
So I think this is a particularly difficult and tricky issue, but one that I think will leave 
room for us to do something on asset purchases, as I’ll come to.  I think it’s worth considering a 
program of longer-term asset purchases intended to keep longer-term yields in the low range that 
June 9–10, 2020
66 of 270


 
 
 
has prevailed since the onset of the crisis.  Purchases could help cement the view that we’re 
steadfast in our commitment to highly accommodative financial conditions.  There are many 
ways to structure such a program, but I do see some appeal in the familiarity of an open-ended 
purchase program at a flow rate broadly similar to the current pace of purchases.  The stated goal 
would be to promote accommodative conditions at least until the recovery in employment and 
inflation are well under way, perhaps.  There could be many formulations. 
Let me quickly then move to the short end of the curve—where we’re looking at yield 
caps.  I’m open to this idea.  The question for me, as others noted, is, under what circumstances 
would a short-term yield curve control program add thrust to the Committee’s deployment of 
forward guidance and asset purchases, thus fostering achievement of our mandated goals, which 
today are far in the distance?  And the answer will depend on the situation we face.  Today, 
markets do find our forward guidance credible, and as long as that’s the case, I’m not clear that 
there would be much of a problem here to be solved.  And I do think we benefit from the 
experience of the Committee keeping the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound for 
seven years.  So, I think, as anticipated, rates really collapsed when the crisis came, because 
markets do believe that we’ll be low for long. 
Wrapping up:  I continue to think that we’re well served by waiting to see how the 
economy evolves in coming months before clarifying our guidance and making further decisions 
about asset purchases.  We’re going to learn a great deal about the path of the pandemic and the 
shape of the recovery in coming months as we see the early months of the reopening of the 
economy take place.  When the time is right, I do expect that we will agree on a strong statement, 
spelling out our steadfast intention to support the recovery and to continue that support so long as 
it is consistent with sustainably achieving our mandate objectives.  All that said, we will have to 
June 9–10, 2020
67 of 270


 
 
 
remain attuned to the possibility that the situation will evolve in a way that requires prompt, 
faster action than that.  If that happens, we will respond appropriately. 
And with that, thanks for a great discussion.  It’s 12:19 p.m.  I think it’s lunchtime.  And 
why don’t we say that we’ll have a break here, and we’ll come back at 20 minutes after 1:00.  
Thanks very much. 
[Lunch recess] 
CHAIR POWELL.  Welcome back, everyone.  We’ll move right into the Desk briefing.  
Lorie, would you like to begin, please? 
MS. LOGAN.2  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I’ll be referring to the handout titled 
“Financial Developments and Open Market Operations” on page 12 of the 
consolidated package of materials. 
Over the intermeeting period, financial conditions continued to ease, driven by 
optimism about reopenings and ongoing policy support.  Market functioning also 
continued to improve.  Reflecting these developments, new usage of Federal Reserve 
operations and facilities generally declined, and market participants focused on the 
fundamental outlook and the FOMC’s next policy steps. 
As outlined on page 13, I’ll discuss four topics.  First, I’ll review the easing in 
financial conditions, highlighting key drivers and risks that remain in focus.  Next, I’ll 
review developments related to Federal Reserve operations and facilities.  I’ll then 
discuss monetary policy expectations and Treasury and MBS market functioning. 
Starting on page 15:  Financial conditions eased further, with momentum building 
and broadening.  As shown in the table on the top left, through last Friday, equities 
rose by almost 12 percent, investment-grade credit spreads narrowed meaningfully, 
and the dollar weakened, all extending moves over the previous period.  Remarkably, 
the S&P 500 index stood just 6 percent below its all-time high, seen in late February, 
and was down only 1 percent year-to-date.  With the gains yesterday, the index is flat 
on the year.  Meanwhile, the nominal Treasury yield curve steepened, as longer-dated 
yields rose. 
I’ll now turn to page 16.  Optimism around reopenings contributed to the broad 
easing in conditions, as parts of the United States and other countries relaxed 
lockdown restrictions.  The optimism was reportedly fueled by encouraging readings 
from alternative high-frequency indicators of activity, like greater mobility as 
 
2 The materials used by Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
June 9–10, 2020
68 of 270


 
 
 
measured by cell phones—shown on the left—and increases in restaurant activity—
shown on the right. 
Additionally, as outlined on page 17, the suite of U.S. and global policy measures 
taken since mid-March laid a foundation for the improvement in conditions.  In 
particular, market participants think monetary policy will remain accommodative.  As 
shown in panel 8, the expected path of policy rates has fallen in most major 
economies.  Funding operations and liquidity facilities continue to support stable 
conditions in short-term dollar funding markets, and credit facilities have contributed 
to more open primary markets and narrower secondary-market spreads.  As shown in 
panel 9, significant fiscal stimulus has been enacted here and abroad. 
Despite the buoyancy in markets, our contacts continue to see the U.S. economic 
outlook as grim and very uncertain.  On the next page, panel 10 shows the average 
PDF for 2020 GDP growth from the Desk’s most recent surveys in dark blue.  The 
distribution was essentially unchanged from April.  Averaging across respondents, the 
greatest probability continued to be placed on growth this year of between minus 
4 and minus 6 percent.  The distribution was wide, and the perceived risks were 
skewed to the downside. 
While the drumbeat of optimism wasn’t reflected in the 2020 growth PDF, the 
probabilities assigned to the U.S. and global economies being in recession in six 
months declined somewhat, as shown in panel 11, suggesting some improvement in 
the outlook next year.  Of course, Friday’s employment report, received after the 
surveys, also likely changed views to some degree. 
So we’ve got buoyant markets alongside an improving but still very dark near-
term outlook.  This contrast led to questions over the period about whether the rally in 
risk assets has been overdone and whether equities in particular adequately price the 
full range of potential outcomes.  One way to shed light on this question is to consider 
how the components that make up equity prices—that is, expected cash flows, risk-
free rates, and risk premiums—might have changed since the virus’s onset.  Page 19 
explores some of these factors. 
On expected cash flows, analysts generally expect a sharp decline in earnings this 
year followed by a strong rebound next, as shown in panel 12, although uncertainty in 
the earnings outlook is especially high, with roughly 40 percent of S&P 500 firms 
having suspended guidance. 
The differentiation in equity performance, shown in panels 13 and 14, looks 
consistent with the view that expectations for growth and earnings have been a 
significant driver.  For example, while cyclical sectors are down a lot since the 
February peak in the overall stock market, health-care and information technology 
shares are about flat.  Firms with relatively strong balance sheets have outperformed. 
With respect to risk-free rates, as I showed earlier, Treasury yields have declined 
significantly, providing a boost to equity prices. 
June 9–10, 2020
69 of 270


 
 
 
As for equity risk premiums, several offsetting factors have likely had effects.  As 
I noted, uncertainty about earnings has risen, which should push risk premiums up.  
Countering that, the aggressive policy response might have reduced perceived tail 
risks, and “reach for yield” behavior driven by low rates may have pushed equity 
premiums down. 
All told, a number of crosscurrents have affected equity prices.  The 
differentiation shown here suggests the rally is not indiscriminate, but expectations 
still seem somewhat optimistic relative to the uncertainty in the outlook. 
Although lower overall Treasury yields have supported equities and other asset 
prices, there has been a notable steepening in the Treasury yield curve in recent 
weeks.  As shown in the top panel of page 20, the spread between the 5- and 30-year 
Treasury yields increased roughly 35 basis points.  The steepening was driven by 
rising longer-run real yields, which models attribute mostly to higher term premiums.   
So did the same optimism I’ve been speaking about drive this steepening in the 
curve?  While it may have played a role, our contacts cited Treasury supply as the 
primary factor.  In particular, the Treasury announced at its May refunding that it 
would concentrate more issuance in longer-dated coupons than had been expected.  
As shown in panel 16, since the beginning of March, the Treasury has increased 
coupon supply by roughly $270 billion out of the total of around $1.5 trillion that 
market participants expect by December.  Some market participants have also pointed 
to the high volume of investment-grade corporate bond issuance this year, shown in 
panel 17, as pushing Treasury yields higher. 
While for most of the period the increase in Treasury yields seem related 
primarily to long-dated term premiums, as talk of “green shoots” has grown more 
recently, the moves have crept forward along the curve and seem potentially more 
related to policy expectations.  The five-year yield ended the period around 10 basis 
points higher.  Looking ahead, Desk contacts caution that rising supply could further 
pressure yields, particularly if it comes alongside a material improvement in the 
economic outlook. 
I’ll close out this discussion of broad financial conditions by noting some key 
risks summarized on page 21.  First is the prospect for a second wave of the virus 
and, more broadly, for health-related developments that necessitate renewed 
economic disruptions.  Market participants think this would lead to a widespread 
resurgence in pressures across global markets. 
Second, even absent more-adverse-than-expected health outcomes, there are risks 
related to how recessionary dynamics already in train might play out.  Concerns 
around corporate credit, emerging markets, and the mortgage sector remain in focus, 
though anxiety around the mortgage sector has eased some as forbearance rates have 
come in below expectations.  And we’ve seen increased focus on the financial 
positions of states and local governments, with a growing number of contacts 
June 9–10, 2020
70 of 270


 
 
 
expressing concern over the effect of lower expenditures and reduced employment in 
this sector. 
And, third, distinct from the virus and the related economic dynamics, markets 
have been focused on escalating tensions between the United States and China and 
point to the U.S. election as a likely driver of markets moving into the fall. 
All of these concerns contrast with the steady improvement in risk sentiment, and 
market participants highlight the vulnerability of markets to the realization of these 
potential downside risks in light of the run-up in risk assets. 
I’ll turn now to Federal Reserve operations and facilities on page 23.  With the 
improvement in market conditions, new usage declined and outstanding amounts 
largely reflected term transactions initiated during the period of funding stress.  The 
credit facilities that became operational over the period experienced only modest 
activity. 
On the funding side, as shown in panel 18, overall Desk repo outstanding declined 
slightly as term transactions matured, although ongoing high Treasury issuance has 
led to increased take-up in overnight operations more recently.  As I previewed at the 
April meeting, given the improvements in funding conditions, we reduced the amount 
of term repo offered over the intermeeting period.  In the upcoming monthly 
schedule, we also intend to position repo operations in a backstop role by modestly 
increasing the minimum bid rates. 
Broader dollar funding conditions also improved.  For example, as shown in panel 
19, after remaining elevated for some time, commercial paper rates fell notably 
relative to expected policy rates.  
While U.S. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding remain around their recent peak of 
$450 billion, most of this is in 84-day swaps that start maturing this week.  Take-up in 
recent operations has been very low, and if the maturing swaps aren’t rolled over, 
total outstanding will decline in the manner shown on the right-hand side of panel 20. 
Starting in July, our central bank counterparts plan to reduce the frequency of the 
seven-day operations in light of these improved conditions.  Meanwhile, take-up in 
the FIMA Repo Facility has been minimal.  We also continue to see declines in 
discount window usage, shown in panel 21. 
The upcoming maturities in both the repo book and the dollar swap lines will 
provide further insight into the robustness of private funding markets.  Our contacts 
broadly note the ongoing importance of these operations as backstops.  In this regard, 
we will be seeking guidance in July on whether to extend beyond September the 
temporary swap lines with the nine additional jurisdictions and the FIMA Repo 
Facility. 
Page 24 covers the 13(3) facilities.  With the improvements in short-term funding 
markets, usage across most of the liquidity facilities has been falling, although the 
June 9–10, 2020
71 of 270


 
 
 
Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility has grown steadily since its launch, 
as seen in panel 22. 
Regarding the credit facilities, stresses in the corporate credit, municipal debt, and 
securitized product markets have eased notably because of the announcements of the 
facilities as well as the broader improvement in markets.  As a result, activity in the 
facilities has been low thus far.  In light of the improvements and low or declining 
take-up, expectations for future usage of the facilities moderated, as shown by the 
shift from the blue to the red diamonds in panel 23. 
Overall, I’d say this is very positive:  The tools have been effective, and the 
backstops appear to have had their intended effect.  Moreover, many contacts note 
that the flexibility the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have shown in making 
adjustments along the way has boosted confidence.  That said, market participants 
have expressed some concern that certifications, disclosures, and user requirements 
may give rise to stigma or make the programs less attractive should strains reemerge. 
I will now turn to monetary policy expectations, on page 26.  Overall, these were 
little changed, and most market participants don’t anticipate policy changes at this 
meeting.  The target range is generally expected to remain at the lower bound for the 
next couple of years.  We see this in market pricing, in panel 24, and in the range of 
modal forecasts from the Desk surveys, in panel 25.  Two features of the underlying 
probabilities that market participants place on different outcomes for the target rate 
are worth noting. 
First, as shown to the left of panel 26, respondents continue to attach less than a 
5 percent chance, on average, to the Committee adopting negative rates through 2022.  
The prospect of negative policy rates was in focus early in the period, as rates on 
federal funds futures settling late this year and next fell to slightly negative levels.  
Most contacts thought technical factors amplified the decline.  Futures rates shifted 
back into positive terrain after the Chair and other Committee members reiterated 
earlier communications that negative interest rates were not considered an attractive 
policy option.  
And, second, while survey respondents place the highest probability on the 
current target range being maintained through the end of 2022, they place significant 
probability on one or more hikes in both 2021 and 2022, shown by the light and dark 
blue bars on the right of this panel.  This comes despite the historic declines in GDP 
expected this year. 
On forward rate guidance, market participants generally don’t expect the 
Committee to make material changes at this meeting, but many anticipate that the 
guidance will eventually be modified and see some chance of a change as most likely 
to come in September. 
While we didn’t ask about forward guidance on the surveys, in response to an 
open-ended question about additional policy measures that the Federal Reserve might 
June 9–10, 2020
72 of 270


 
 
 
adopt this year, around one-half of respondents noted that they expect some change to 
the current forward guidance, and about one-fourth explicitly noted that they expect 
outcome-based guidance.  Roughly one-third noted that they expect some form of 
yield curve control.  
Interestingly, those that expected yield curve control had lower expected rate 
paths and, as shown in panel 27, anticipated a lower median dot for 2022 in this 
meeting’s Summary of Economic Projections.  The notable probability placed on a 
hike by 2022 and the difference in SEP dot expectations suggest there may be some 
scope to reduce market uncertainty about the path of the target rate. 
I’ll conclude with the staff’s assessment of Treasury securities market and MBS 
market functioning and considerations for asset purchases going forward, starting on 
page 28.  Overall, functioning has improved substantially.  This is evident across a 
range of indicators, many of which have essentially returned to the levels seen before 
the pandemic.  For example, as shown in panels 28 and 29, bid-ask spreads in the 
Treasury securities and agency MBS markets are back near their pre-March levels.  
Other measures, like the average spread between actual Treasury security prices and a 
fitted curve, have continued to improve, but these have not yet returned to their pre-
March levels.  The still-elevated levels of some of these indicators may reflect 
structural factors.  We continue to monitor these given the uncertainty in the outlook, 
heavy Treasury debt issuance, and continued work-from-home stance of many market 
participants. 
In light of the improvements, the Desk gradually reduced the pace of purchases 
over the intermeeting period to their current levels of $4 billion per day in Treasury 
securities and $4.5 billion per day in agency MBS, as shown in panel 30.  These 
equate to monthly increases in SOMA holdings of roughly $80 billion and $40 
billion, respectively, significantly lower than the peak pace in mid-March.  Continued 
purchases at the current pace could help sustain the gains we’ve seen and would be 
roughly in line with market expectations of Treasury security purchases and toward 
the lower end of expectations of MBS purchases.  
As shown on page 29, in the Desk’s most recent surveys, the median expectation 
of monthly purchases, net of the reinvestments, averaged around $85 billion through 
September for Treasury securities and $55 billion through September for agency 
MBS. 
In terms of the communications regarding purchases, expectations are that the 
Committee will reframe the objectives around policy accommodation in coming 
meetings, possibly in line with broader changes to the framework. 
If the Committee were to direct the Desk to increase Treasury, agency MBS, and 
agency CMBS holdings at least at the current pace, some elements of our operational 
approach would change.  In particular, we would shift to monthly purchase amounts 
with semimonthly schedules, and agency MBS reinvestments over the purchase 
period would be noted separately. 
June 9–10, 2020
73 of 270


 
 
 
We would continue with the current composition of Treasury purchases, which 
has been effective at supporting market functioning.  However, we would transition to 
an MBS purchase allocation that places a modestly higher weight on more recently 
issued coupons, now that market dislocations in older production coupons have 
abated somewhat. 
Finally, these changes could be communicated in a Desk statement, a draft of 
which is shown in the appendix to your materials.  A summary of recently conducted 
small-value operational tests, as well as those we expect to do over the upcoming 
period, is also shown in the appendix.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Patricia and I look 
forward to your questions. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  Thank you, Lorie.  Are there any questions for Lorie or 
Patricia?  If so, Skype me.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none and seeing no hands raised, we 
now need a vote to ratify—  
MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chair, this is Charlie Evans.  I lost connection, and I’m on the phone 
right now.  Could I ask a question? 
CHAIR POWELL.  Please. 
MR. EVANS.  Lorie, I might have missed something, but on page 19, where you’re 
talking about whether equities are overdone, and in chart 14 you’ve got firms with strong versus 
weak balance sheets, and clearly the strong balance sheets are doing better than the weak balance 
sheets, is it the strong balance sheet firms that are in the equity indexes?  Or was it also the low 
interest rates that are responsible?  I don’t quite think I caught the punchline there.  
MS. LOGAN.  Overall, I’d say it’s fairly remarkable, with stocks flat this year and off 
6 percent of the highs.  I think the rally has been driven by optimism about reopening and the 
low risk-free rates that bolster equity prices.  Earnings are expected to rebound sharply next year, 
credit spreads tighter, and issuances strong, even for the poor credits.  Still, I think what I was 
trying to show on that page was that there is still some differentiation.  Sector performance in 
stocks shows cyclical companies down while is technology up, and the companies with weak 
balance sheets generally have underperformed and have higher credit spreads. 
June 9–10, 2020
74 of 270


 
 
 
So I think the main point is that what we’re seeing is not indiscriminate.  Overall, the 
strength of the index as a whole has been a bit surprising to us and many of our contacts, and that 
could suggest that markets are not fully priced for the full range of potential outcomes. 
MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thanks.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  So, Lorie, I had a follow-up question—really, 
to President Evans, and also just looking at your—I think it’s chart 27 in your packet in which 
you review the median expectations.  I guess what I wanted to know is, I thought you had 
characterized there to be a little room for us to become more specific about the guidance, that 
there are some market participants that think we’re going to raise earlier than I think we’ve 
talked about.  So do you think they just have a fundamentally different view of the economy, if 
we were going to be clear?  Or do you think they have a different view of our policy reaction 
function?  Where is the disagreement in their views?  
MS. LOGAN.  I think, overall, the FOMC’s forward guidance has been credible so far.  I 
think, as has been discussed by a number of participants, rates are low.  Nonetheless, I think 
there’s some uncertainty in rates.  As you can see in chart 26, survey respondents placed more 
than a 50 percent probability on rate increases in 2022 even before the employment report.  So I 
think that this may suggest risks to higher rates if the economy performs better than expected.  I 
think stronger, clearer forward guidance could help some.  Yield curve control could also 
provide some insurance against rates rising before the FOMC wanted them to.  So I think, 
overall, removing uncertainty could also bring down overall interest rates. 
In terms of the difference in panel 27, from what we looked at in the survey it didn’t 
seem to come from different views in their economic outlooks. 
June 9–10, 2020
75 of 270


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Lorie.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  I’m seeing no further questions and no one waving a hand, so with 
that, we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations that were conducted since the 
April meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Thank you.  Without objection.  I 
didn’t step over somebody’s question there, did I?  [No response]  No?  [No response]  Okay.  
Let’s now turn to a review of financial and economic developments.  Stacey, would you like to 
start, please? 
MS. TEVLIN.3  Thank you, Chair Powell.  My materials start on page 34 of the 
combined packet.  
Friday’s employment report provided evidence that the labor market recovery 
likely started in May, though clearly it has a long way to go.  As shown by the bottom 
black bar in panel 1, BLS payrolls rose 2.5 million in May following the historic 
20 million job loss in April, the light blue bar.  As shown by the upper black bars, net 
job gains were reasonably widespread last month, and they were largest in categories 
in which we think social distancing was an important factor, such as leisure and 
hospitality, which includes restaurants; retail trade; and health care.  Cumulative BLS 
private job losses are shown by the blue dots in panel 2 and totaled 18 million as of 
mid-May.  The nascent upturn shown here is similar to that of our in-house weekly 
estimates of paid cumulative employment losses based on data from ADP, the black 
dots.  Job losses among people who have actually been removed from firms’ active 
rosters, the red line, which we equate with more permanent losses, are not as large but 
also have not yet started to reverse. 
We are projecting that the upturn will prove durable and expect further job gains 
in the June report, as indicated by the blue hollow dot, based on the two weeks of 
ADP data we have since the May BLS reference week; data on cell phone movements 
to workplaces, the black line in panel 3; a measure of hours worked by small 
businesses, the red line in that panel; and our assumption that social distancing, both 
mandatory and voluntary, is easing further this month. 
The May figures from the BLS came in much more upbeat than we expected.  
However, we had been expecting a huge increase in payrolls to occur in June, and we 
 
3 The materials used by Ms. Tevlin are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
June 9–10, 2020
76 of 270


 
 
 
are interpreting the surprise as primarily reflecting an earlier bounceback than 
expected.  As a result, we have moderated our June forecast of payroll gains. 
Panel 4 shows the unemployment rates for different racial and ethnic groups.  
Although all the groups shown here now have unemployment rates well into the 
double digits, the jobless rates of black and Hispanic workers have risen to especially 
high levels, a continuation of the pattern we have seen in past recessions.  And I 
should note that even with the positive signs in the May data, the elevated level of 
joblessness and the more gradual recovery that we are forecasting for the second half 
means we only expect the overall unemployment rate to fall to about 9 percent by the 
end of the year. 
Like employment, we have a variety of indicators that suggest consumer 
spending, the subject of your next exhibit, is moving up gradually after its collapse in 
April.  According to two different high-frequency sources shown in panel 5, over the 
past few weeks consumers have been spending at close to the level seen a year ago.  
Panel 6 shows that although motor vehicle sales also bounced up in May, they remain 
at a low level.  And spending on services, which constitute around half of consumer 
purchases, appears to have moved up only tepidly from its April lows, at least judging 
from the categories we can observe, some of which are shown in panel 7.  The upturn 
in overall consumer spending may be due, in part, to the reopening of the economy 
seen so far, and we do see a somewhat faster rebound in states that reopened earlier, 
the black line in panel 8.  But even the states that reopened later, shown in the red 
line, are seeing a significant bounce in sales, which likely has a lot to do with fiscal 
stimulus, a subject I will revisit shortly.  
Despite the somewhat more upbeat tenor of the data, we have weakened our 
projection pretty substantially since the April Tealbook, as noted on the next exhibit.  
As shown by the dark green bars, we now expect that GDP will fall nearly 7 percent 
this year, compared with about a 4 percent decline in our earlier projection.  The 
primary reason is that we now expect the spread of COVID-19 to slow by less than 
we’d anticipated in April, as public health measures have made less progress 
containing the spread than we had assumed.  A secondary reason is that we increased 
the expected drag on demand from the severe budget pressures faced by state and 
local governments.  We now expect aggregate demand next year to bounce back more 
from the deeper shock. 
Panel 10 shows an index of the level of real GDP this year and next year, the 
black line, along with various influences on it in our projection.  The most important 
influence is the direct effect from mandatory and voluntary social distancing and 
related production disruptions, the light blue line, which we assume will hit bottom 
this quarter but will not fully dissipate until late next year.  On the plus side, we have 
the positive effects of fiscal spending, the navy blue line, which provides massive 
support this year, and monetary policy, the red line.  We have built in fairly standard 
effects of monetary policy here based on the reduction in Treasury rates estimated 
empirically in past episodes and on a rough estimate of how Federal Reserve actions 
may have brought down spreads and the equity risk premium.  This estimate should 
June 9–10, 2020
77 of 270


 
 
 
be viewed as a lower bound, as it likely does not include all the improvements in 
confidence, uncertainty, and financial market functioning; it is hard to imagine just 
how bad these might have been in the absence of forceful Fed action. 
The gold line combines a number of other influences that we assume are going to 
slow the pace of recovery.  These include the usual multiplier effects like declining 
income and profits on household and business spending; effects that seem especially 
bad during recessions such as uncertainty, pessimism, and reduced access to credit; 
and more persistent effects like the loss of worker skills, less investment in capital 
goods and R&D, and the loss of intangible business capital. 
As you all know, the drop in real GDP in the first half of this year is likely to be 
the largest since the Depression.  However, our assessment is that much of the sharp 
drop in production reflects mandatory closures of nonessential concerns and other 
restrictions.  Because we view these as temporary structural effects, they do not really 
represent slack in the economy.  For instance, we are assuming that a measure of the 
natural rate of unemployment that includes short-run disruptions, panel 11, jumped 
this quarter as workers are being prevented from supplying labor by closures and 
stay-at-home orders.  Putting supply and demand together, our measure of the output 
gap is shown by the black line in the next panel.  Clearly, this recession started much 
faster than any other post–World War II recession, but—under our assumptions about 
how much of the GDP drop is due to aggregate supply—the trough is about as deep 
as the recessions that started in 1973 and 2007.  The key question is, how fast will it 
recover?  We have built in a relatively brisk recovery in our projection—one that is 
much closer to the recovery that started in 1982 than to the recovery that started in 
2009.  There are two main reasons for that.  The first is that we judge the regulated 
financial sector to be much more resilient in this episode.  The second is the rapid 
response from monetary and fiscal policymakers.  The fiscal policy response and its 
support of the household sector is the subject of your next exhibit. 
Panel 13 shows the increase in the deficit as a share of GDP, along with the peak 
rise in the unemployment rate, for the first year of 10 recessionary periods.  
Compared with past episodes, the response of fiscal policy this year has been 
unusually large and timely.  The huge federal transfers led to a historic rise in the 
saving rate in April, which is not shown here.  But aggregate numbers can mask the 
experience of individuals, and we know, as shown in panel 14, that job losses have 
been much greater for workers in the lowest wage quartile.  To get a better sense of 
how well different households might actually be faring, my colleagues Lisa Dettling, 
Neil Bhutta, Kevin Moore, and Jackie Blair have used microdata from the Survey of 
Consumer Finances to identify the household resources of families.  Their work, in 
panel 15, shows that the recent fiscal measures to support households’ incomes, the 
red and blue portions of the bars, combined with the automatic stabilizers, the gray 
portions, and existing household resources, the orange portions, will be sufficient to 
tide over most working households for the next six months if they lose all of their 
income.  This result obtains even though the CARES UI payments expire after four 
months and also holds for those who work in industries with the highest likelihood of 
being thrown out of work—the topmost bar. 
June 9–10, 2020
78 of 270


 
 
 
This is reassuring news, but it seems at odds with news we hear about 
overburdened food banks and households’ despair.  One partial explanation for that 
tension is shown in panel 16.  The line on the left is net job losses by week, and the 
line on the right is the cumulative payout of UI benefits.  There is, on average, a 
three-week lag between these two lines.  And the average obscures the experiences of 
individual families.  My sister, for instance, received her benefits in less than two 
weeks, while my neighbor waited five weeks.  By late May, we think the stimulus 
checks and the UI benefits had been much more broadly received, though workers 
without bank accounts or steady addresses might still be waiting.  The ample fiscal 
response is an important reason that we are projecting the recovery will be relatively 
brisk. 
Regarding my final exhibit, so far I have been discussing the staff baseline 
projection, which was based on the assumption that the spread of the virus will 
consist of periodic and localized flare-ups but not a large second wave.  As we have 
noted since the pandemic began, an outcome that we consider to be equally as 
plausible as our baseline projection is one in which caseloads soar in the fall, 
resulting in the reinstatement of another round of intensive social distancing and a hit 
to economic activity that is larger and more protracted than in the baseline.  The 
exhibits on this last page summarize the outlook under such a scenario.  In this case, 
we would expect the unemployment rate to move back up again around the end of the 
year.  Moreover, with the financial system already facing elevated losses and 
depressed earnings from the first wave and with fiscal and monetary policy likely to 
have less capacity to respond, we would expect the recovery to be much more 
prolonged, leading to additional permanent damage, even lower inflation, and the 
federal funds rate remaining at the ELB for much longer.  And now I’ll turn it over to 
Beth Anne. 
MS. WILSON.4  I will continue Stacey’s cheery tale by describing the damage 
being wrought by COVID-19 abroad.  As you can see in the second international 
slide, page 40, a collapse in the foreign economies seems very much in train.  Real 
GDP growth is expected to fall almost 30 percent at an annual rate this quarter after 
an 11 percent drop in the last.  These declines will bring the estimated level of foreign 
real GDP almost 12 percent below what we had been anticipating when we met in 
January, marking the largest decline in foreign real GDP in generations.  Moreover, 
we have little hope of a full return to the pre-COVID path in the medium term. 
The disease and measures to contain it are central to this outlook, and slide 3 
presents our assumptions about the stringency of restrictions on activity for key 
advanced and emerging market economies:  Green represents a low level of 
restrictions on social interaction and international travel, and red indicates strict 
shelter-in-place.  As you well know, the disease and the restrictions in response 
started in China and East Asia, spread to Europe, and are now hitting other EMEs—
importantly, Latin America.  We anticipate that the easing of restrictions will follow 
that same pattern.  Greater progress in containment and rigorous monitoring in the 
 
4 The materials used by Ms. Wilson are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
June 9–10, 2020
79 of 270


 
 
 
first-hit countries have led us to revise our expectations of stringency down, 
represented by the minus signs in the boxes.  In Latin America, we are already seeing 
difficulties implementing effective shelter-in-place restrictions and anticipate that the 
virus will prove hard to contain there.  Thus, some degree of social distancing may 
extend through next year in that region, as in some other EMEs.  
Slide 4 illustrates how the stringency of COVID-19 restrictions relates to our 
forecast—overlaying the colors indicating restrictiveness with our forecasts for 
selected economies and regions.  In China and several other East Asian economies, 
we project the effect of the virus will be severe but relatively short lived.  Scarred by 
earlier experience with SARS, the region has had a rapid and comprehensive 
response, and strong systems have been put in place to contain flare-ups.  In contrast, 
we expect the hit will be greater and more sustained in Europe, where the response 
lagged somewhat and underlying economic and financial conditions were less robust.  
This is even truer for Latin America, where the structural challenges are greater and 
the response in some countries has been delayed and disorganized. 
While we are reasonably confident about our very near-term forecast, our 
assurance fades fast and furiously thereafter in the face of vast epidemiological and 
economic uncertainty.  Given that, we are using a variety of means to attempt to 
diminish, define, and quantify the uncertainty and risks around our medium-term 
forecast.  I will turn to those next. 
First, clicking to slide 5, we are closely examining current experiences to help us 
refine our baseline and reduce uncertainty.  Three early patterns are emerging:  
Lockdowns have generally been effective in controlling the spread of the virus; 
earlier, more rigorous, and more strategic responses have typically led to less costly 
experiences; and, conversely, countries with slower and less stringent responses, 
greater structural challenges such as impediments to testing and lockdowns, or a high 
density of poor populations appear to suffer greater economic costs.  These early 
patterns help shape our baseline outlook, leading us to be more confident about our 
recoveries for China and East Asia and more concerned about other EMEs. 
As illustrated in the next slide, we attempt to define the uncertainty surrounding 
our forecast through cohesive, well-defined scenario analysis that incorporates 
frequently-cited alternatives to our baseline assumptions.  We could be surprised by 
the rapidity of the recovery when restrictions are lifted, as we caught glimpses of this 
last week.  Moreover, our assumption that a vaccine will not be widely available until 
the end of next year could prove too pessimistic, given the intense medical efforts 
globally.  Such outcomes are represented by our “Early Moderation” scenario.  It is 
also quite possible that the virus proves more difficult to contain—as we are seeing in 
several economies lately—and possibly resurges later in the year, leading to greater 
economic, financial, and social costs, as detailed in our “Second Waves” scenario.  
Finally, as reflected in our “Depression” scenario, the virus and its effect could be 
severe enough to trigger financial and political crises, leading to deep declines in 
output and soaring unemployment.  These scenarios help bound the uncertainty by 
providing well-articulated paths for the foreign economy that are based on 
June 9–10, 2020
80 of 270


 
 
 
commonly-cited alternative views.  However, they do not provide any statistical or 
empirically based sense of the uncertainty we are facing.  For that, I would like to 
highlight two other approaches. 
A relatively simple historical context to our baseline path is described in slides 7 
and 8.  The current COVID-19 crisis is often compared to past extreme global events.  
Drawing on the work of Barro and Ursua (2008), we use 130 years of data for 
42 countries in search of extreme macroeconomic events—“disasters,” if you will.  
These events predominantly happen around the Spanish Flu Epidemic of 1918, the 
Great Depression, and the two world wars and are associated with declines in annual 
GDP of 10 percent or greater.  The red lines in the two charts describe the median 
path of the level of annual GDP per capita for the advanced and emerging economies 
in the aftermath of such disasters.  The red shaded areas capture the 15th to 85th 
percentile range around this median.  As can be seen, our baseline path for the AFEs, 
the black line on the left, lies in the upper tail of the past disaster experiences.  Our 
baseline EME projection appears even more optimistic.  Thus, if you thought the 
current crisis was on par with these past disasters, our Tealbook outlook might look 
too optimistic. 
Slide 8 presents another point of comparison—those severe periods over the past 
60 years associated with a collapse in real GDP growth in one quarter of more than 
10 percent at an annual rate.  Compared with these somewhat less drastic cases, our 
current projection initially looks more negative for the advanced economies and about 
on par for the EMEs.  But the faster bounceback that we have built into our baseline 
returns GDP to pre-crisis levels in about the same number of quarters as the medians 
of these earlier episodes. 
What do we learn from this analysis?  There are reasons to expect a sharper 
bounceback now, including the very swift and strong response of policymakers 
around the world and the sharp off-and-then-on nature of many of the social-
distancing restrictions.  However, these exercises do point to the more lasting damage 
typically associated with such deep declines in output and provide support to our 
view that, despite buoyant financial markets and some encouraging data of late, risks 
are still tilted to the downside. 
Another way of using historical experience to assess the range of uncertainty and 
risk is with an increasingly common statistical technique called growth at risk, or 
GaR, discussed on slide 9.  Staff work on this is detailed in a box in the R&U section 
of the Tealbook, but, simply put, this framework generates estimates of the possible 
range of GDP growth, say 12 months out, based on current macroeconomic and 
financial conditions and, as such, helps us assess the uncertainty around the future 
path of GDP.  To capture current conditions, we construct macroeconomic and 
financial indicators using a dynamic factor model to extract common movements in 
foreign macroeconomic data including GDP, IP, retail sales, and PMIs and financial 
market metrics such as the VIX and corporate spreads.  These monthly real-time 
indicators are shown to the left.  Note that, compared with the Global Financial 
Crisis, the current deterioration in macroeconomic conditions is greater and that of 
June 9–10, 2020
81 of 270


 
 
 
financial conditions is less.  This likely reflects both the abrupt global shutdowns in 
foreign activity and the rapid policy response that characterize this crisis.  Note also, 
as seen in the middle panel, that financial conditions have improved rapidly since the 
start of the crisis, as Lorie just described.  In turn, the macro indicator is capturing 
signals from the data showing that the recent precipitous economic decline may be 
bottoming out, at least in aggregate. 
Using these current conditions indicators, the growth-at-risk methodology allows 
us to estimate the range of possible outcomes of aggregate foreign real GDP growth 
one year ahead at any point in time.  The resulting distributions for key dates are 
shown to the right.  In general, the wider the distribution, the greater the uncertainty, 
and the more negative the tail, the greater the risks to growth. 
The blue line is the conditional distribution of predicted GDP outcomes based on 
the financial and macro conditions abroad in the happier times of last December.  As 
you can see, the median was for about 2 percent growth in the foreign economies over 
the next 12 months and had very limited upside and downside risks.  By April, the 
bright red line, that picture had darkened dramatically as financial conditions and, 
particularly, macroeconomic indicators deteriorated.  The median growth rate shifted 
to negative 2 percent, and the distribution was skewed decidedly to the left.  In May, 
the black line, conditions improved, especially for financial markets, and this has 
helped contain risks.  By comparison, the distribution during the height of the GFC, 
in dark red, showed median expected growth comparable to May but fatter left-side 
tails, reflecting the more acute financial stresses at the time. 
This approach provides a very timely sense of the risks and uncertainties 
associated with the path of real GDP growth.  Comparing the May and April 
distributions, for example, we can see both the benefits of reduced financial stresses 
but also the potential risks should financial conditions deteriorate again.  This 
sensitivity to changes in underlying conditions can also be viewed as a disadvantage, 
however, as the assessment of uncertainty can be so rapidly changing.  More 
generally, the use of this methodology, as with many others, assumes that past 
historical experience is a relevant guide for the current situation. 
As this review of our approaches to uncertainty shows, developments both on the 
ground and of our tools have allowed us to come a long way since early March when 
we faced almost Knightian uncertainty.  We have more experience with the course of 
the virus and the effect of the response, we can place our baseline in historical 
context, and we can start to quantify the downside risks based on historical empirical 
relationships.  However, beyond the near term, we are still at the mercy of the course 
of the disease and the possibility of reaching tipping points in terms of financial and 
social stability.  For us in the International Finance Division, those tipping points 
seem much nearer for the EMEs.  Given this, IF and New York Fed staff have 
designed a detailed system for monitoring emerging market economy stresses.  So far, 
the improvement in global financial markets has taken some of some of the pressure 
off of EMEs, but, as the economic and political costs of the virus mount, we will be 
June 9–10, 2020
82 of 270


 
 
 
watching carefully for signs of greater strain and the possibility that downside risks 
are being realized. 
And, with that, I end on the same chipper note as I began and hand the phone over 
to Mark to learn how you all feel about the outlook. 
MR. CARLSON.5  Thank you.  I will be referring to the “Materials for Briefing 
on Summary of Economic Projections” that begin on page 50 of your packet. 
I am sure that you will not be surprised to hear that your latest projections differ 
dramatically from your projections in December, with all of you estimating that 
economic activity has plunged in the first half of this year as a result of social 
distancing and other measures aimed at containing the pandemic.  Your projections 
indicate that it will take some time for the economy to recover, and, accordingly, 
nearly all of you judge it appropriate to maintain the current target range for the 
federal funds rate throughout the forecast period.  A majority of you reported 
conditioning your projections on the absence of a second wave of contagion or on 
future flare-ups being local in nature.  A common theme of your narratives was that 
the course of the virus and its effects on the economy are highly uncertain, making 
your economic projections and assessments about appropriate policy also more 
uncertain than usual.  A solid majority of you view the risks to your outlook for 
economic activity and the labor market as adversely skewed and inflation risks as 
weighted to the downside. 
As shown in exhibit 1 on page 51, your forecasts call for real GDP to contract 
between 4.2 and 10 percent this year, with the median participant seeing a contraction 
of 6.5 percent; GDP is then projected by the median participant to expand at a pace 
above its estimated longer-run rate through 2022.  Your projections of the 
unemployment rate in the final quarter of this year range from 7 to 14 percent, with 
the median being 9.3 percent.  All of you then expect the unemployment rate to 
decrease in each of the next two years.  Highlighting the challenge of assessing the 
economic damage caused by the pandemic and forecasting the recovery in the labor 
market, the width of the range of your forecasts for the unemployment rate at the end 
of this year and next year are 7 percentage points and 7.5 percentage points, 
respectively—more than three times the widest ranges for forecasts of similar 
horizons that occurred during the financial crisis. 
This dispersion aside, almost all of you who submitted longer-run projections 
expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 2022 will still be above your longer-
run estimate.  Among the factors most commonly noted to explain the persistence of 
slack over the projection period are the continuation of voluntary social distancing, 
unusual disruptions to labor markets, and the need for businesses to restructure 
operations.  Only a few of you revised your longer-run estimates of the 
unemployment rate or real GDP growth, and a couple of you indicated that you would 
 
5 The materials used by Mr. Carlson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
June 9–10, 2020
83 of 270


 
 
 
be attuned to the possibility that the pandemic had inflicted longer-lasting damage on 
the economy. 
With respect to inflation, the median projection is for headline and core PCE 
inflation to slow this year to 0.8 percent and 1.0 percent, respectively.  Inflation is 
expected to rise over the next couple of years.  However, almost all of you expect 
PCE inflation to fall short of the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in 
2022, with the median projection being 1.7 percent. 
Exhibit 2 reports your assessments of the appropriate path of the federal funds 
rate.  As shown by the blue dots in the top panel, almost all of you indicated that it 
would be appropriate to maintain the current target range through at least the end of 
2022.  Some of you noted in your narratives that your assessment of appropriate 
monetary policy includes additional measures, such as forward guidance or asset 
purchases.  The median longer-run level of the federal funds rate, at 2.5 percent, is 
unchanged from December. 
The green diamonds in exhibit 2 show the most likely year-end midpoint of the 
target range for the federal funds rate, as reported by the median respondent to the 
Desk’s latest Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants.  The 
green whiskers show the corresponding interquartile ranges of the distribution of the 
most likely policy rates.  These statistics indicate that the bulk of Desk survey 
respondents, like the vast majority of FOMC participants, expect the current target 
range to be maintained through 2022, with the remaining respondents generally 
seeing only modest increases starting in 2022. 
Exhibit 3 presents your judgments about the uncertainty and risks surrounding 
your projections.  As shown in the left panels, all of you view the uncertainty about 
all four variables in your projections as greater than the average over the past 
20 years, which is the first time this has been the case in the SEP.  As the top-right 
panels illustrate, a substantial majority of you judge the risks to your real GDP 
growth projections as skewed to the downside and the risks to your unemployment 
rate projections as skewed to the upside.  Similarly, as the bottom-right panels show, 
a substantial majority of you view the risks to your inflation projections as skewed to 
the downside. 
As noted at the outset, the course of the virus was mentioned in many of your 
narratives as a key source of uncertainty, with the possibilities of second waves of 
contagion and delays in developing a vaccine seen as potential downside risks to the 
economic outlook and faster-than-anticipated progress in responding to, or in treating, 
the virus as potential upside risks.  You also mentioned a number of other unknowns 
and risk factors, including the extent of supply-side disruptions, possible changes in 
household behavior, dislocations associated with the elevated levels of business 
bankruptcies, the extent of fiscal support, and the low foreign demand given the 
global nature of the pandemic.  Several of you also expressed concerns about longer-
run issues in the event of a prolonged recession, such as labor market scarring if the 
June 9–10, 2020
84 of 270


 
 
 
unemployment rate stays elevated or inflation persistently undershooting the 
Committee’s longer-run goal. 
I will end my briefing here.  We would welcome any questions you might have. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Any questions for our briefers, either on Skype or 
through the hand-waving method?  President Barkin.  
MR. BARKIN.  Thanks.  Stacey, just a question on the “Second Waves” scenario.  I just 
noted how long it took in that scenario for us to converge back to anything like the path we 
would be on without it.  What’s your sense in the models?  What drives the length of that gap? 
MS. TEVLIN.  One thing is that we also added into that scenario a little bit of additional 
drag due to supply-side damage, and we assumed that there was not as much capacity for 
policymakers to respond, and that the financial market conditions were not—there had already 
been some difficulty in the first round, and so there wasn’t as much ability for financial market 
conditions to be as healthy.  So we’ve built all that in.  I wouldn’t say that’s necessarily built 
in—that’s not something that’s a feature of the models.  Those are assumptions that we made 
because we think that’s more likely if we were to get into the “Second Waves” scenario. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thanks. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Kashkari, please. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Stacey, on slide 36, your chart 12, you have a 
graph of the output gap today compared with other recessions.  Can you explain that?  I would 
have thought, given so much more labor market slack and a higher unemployment rate, that the 
output gap would be driven by labor market slack, and the output gap would be larger today than 
in previous recessions.  What am I missing?  Why are they so similar? 
MS. TEVLIN.  So if you look at the panel to the left, the natural rate of unemployment, 
that is our assumption that a good part of what’s going on in the labor market is structural, and so 
June 9–10, 2020
85 of 270


 
 
 
the gap isn’t falling as far.  And decisions about what to put into the forecast—how much is 
supply and how much is demand—are difficult to make.  It’s hard, as you know, even ex post, 
looking back at recessions many years later, to disentangle those—to do it in real time for big 
changes like this is difficult.  But we looked by state and by industry and thought hard about 
where we thought the restrictions were mandatory, as opposed to driven by demand, and made 
those assumptions to aggregate supply.  And so, therefore, even with the very large decline in 
GDP and the big rise in the unemployment rate, you don’t see as much of a decline in the output 
gap as you might have thought. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Can I just follow up for a second?  You said that I should look at 
chart 11.  Is that what you pointed me to?  I just want to make sure I’m following. 
MS. TEVLIN.  Yes, panel 11.  
MR. KASHKARI.  Can you just walk me through that?  What would I be looking at to 
see that?  It just isn’t obvious to me, and I apologize. 
MS. TEVLIN.  That’s our assumption about what the natural rate of unemployment is 
going to look like.  And that includes both the— 
MR. KASHKARI.  Oh, I see, yes.  The natural rate of unemployment is what took off.  
And so the fact that the unemployment rate exceeds that, that’s what represents the output gap.  I 
mean, I guess maybe that’s the method in all of the other charts, but I would humbly quibble 
with that, the idea that the natural rate of unemployment is 10 percent and so the effective 
unemployment rate is really only 5 percent above that.  I mean, I guess we could take that 
offline.  But I appreciate it.  Thank you for explaining it.  I now understand how you did it. 
MS. TEVLIN.  Yes.  I mean, it’s a difficult issue, so on the one hand, you could imagine 
that we could have just kept the more long-run natural rate of unemployment in assessing our 
June 9–10, 2020
86 of 270


 
 
 
overall slack.  But if we’re thinking about what’s going to actually affect prices and wages, for 
instance, we don’t think that these people being restricted from going to their jobs are going to 
put pressure on wages, right?  So this jump in the natural rate is meant to get at how much actual 
slack we think is in labor markets, given the unemployment rate. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Okay.  Thank you.  That’s clear. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thanks.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I just have a comment or a question 
for both Stacey and Beth Anne, actually.  On page 110 in the Tealbook, there was a really nice, 
interesting box on risks to the forecast, and it referred to growth-at-risk types of models, and, 
Beth Anne, you have that on page 47, slide 9, of your presentation. 
I really appreciate that the staff is bringing these models to the discussion at the table.  I 
think I mentioned some of the work among my colleagues at the New York Fed on that, so I’m 
very positive about doing this.  But I will say that looking at what was in the Tealbook and 
looking at what you present here shows that we should be careful in interpreting these.  If you 
look at your chart—I’ll just use the one that everyone has in front of them on slide 9, page 47 of 
60.  In December, there was essentially no chance that real GDP would fall during 2020, 
according to this model.  And then, by April, there was a high probability that GDP would fall by 
more than 5 percent.  And then in May it looks like it can’t possibly fall by more than 5 percent.  
Again, these are over the next 12 months. 
So when you look closely here, one of the things is, what’s happened during this 
period—why these things are flying around is not just because of COVID-19.  Because between 
April and May—that’s just a month, and we’re in the middle of this—is that inputs into these 
models, specifically the macro uncertainty input, has just completely blown up, is at completely 
June 9–10, 2020
87 of 270


 
 
 
unprecedented levels, six times that—I’m talking about the U.S. model in the Tealbook—of what 
was true at the peak of the Global Financial Crisis. 
I think it’s great that we’re trying to bring these tools here.  I just would caution, 
especially on this May 2020 chart, that these models right now are very sensitive to these huge 
movements in conditioning factors.  They’re moving around a lot. 
I’m supposed to put this into a question.  I just think that as we watch these, we should be 
cautious that the conditioning factors themselves are really unusual movements, and those are 
what’s driving it, and maybe not put so much emphasis on what the model itself is showing.  
Don’t you agree?  [Laughter] 
MS. WILSON.  I do agree, which is why I highlighted that in my remarks.  I think this is 
an increasingly commonly used framework—financial market participants are referring to this, 
and certainly the IMF is highlighting this.  I think what you see here is how sensitive this 
measure is.  It’s nice that it’s in real time.  It provides this nice distribution.  But it is highly 
sensitive to the movements of the inputs.  And also, especially because there are so few 
observations in the tail, that’s another sensitivity of this technique.  So I completely agree with 
you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Well, I’m going to make it convenient, Beth Anne, because I’m going to 
stay on the same chart.  I had the same question that Vice Chair Williams had, but I’ll add 
another part to it, which is, in looking at May 2020 versus April 2020, a lot has changed, in terms 
of central banks and fiscal agents across the globe saying they’re willing to do whatever it takes 
to not have this dig a deep hole. 
June 9–10, 2020
88 of 270


 
 
 
So, in your mind, does that add another layer of caution that this is—if we look at this, 
we could say, “Wow, this is very optimistic” or “This looks like really good news,” but all of this 
is conditioned on financial variables, which are responsive to the expectations of further policy 
actions.  So I am just trying to see if I’m interpreting this correctly as another caution.  
MS. WILSON.  That’s definitely—in that little middle panel, you see the big spike but 
then the immediate retracement of the financial indicator.  One of the big reasons why that has 
retraced, of course, is the significant actions of fiscal and monetary authorities globally to come, 
and those have had a big calming effect on financial markets.  Should that spike up again, for 
whatever reason—political stresses, news about the virus, incoming data, changes in the policy 
stance or the commitment—we could see that revert, I think, quickly back to a much more 
adverse situation. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  And excellent presentations, thank you very much.  Just 
a quick question for Stacey, and I guess it’s vaguely related to page 34.  I’m just wondering, how 
much did our ability to analyze the ADP data help us in anticipating a very large surprise in the 
May payroll?  And were we closer than private forecasters, or did we also miss it by a mile 
despite having that ADP data? 
MS. TEVLIN.  So we were closer, and—actually, because Bill Wascher and I can’t see 
each other, we decided ahead of time that he was going to answer the labor questions, and I 
almost forgot that.  So I’m going to let him answer this question. 
MR. WASCHER.  Okay, thanks, Stacey.  So, yes, we were closer.  A lot of the private 
forecasters were forecasting declines of something like 7 million, 6 million to 7 million, and we 
June 9–10, 2020
89 of 270


 
 
 
were forecasting a decline of 4.5 million.  So we still missed by a mile, but we didn’t miss by 
two miles, I guess, is one way to think of it. 
So, clearly, we were balancing a number of different indicators.  The ADP numbers were 
on the positive side, but we were also continuing to see very large numbers of initial claims 
being filed, and that led us to write down the decline we had put in for May.  And I think that’s 
what other private forecasters were looking at as well.  And then some of the other surveys, like 
the Census Household Pulse Survey and the Blick and Blandin survey, were also still showing 
declines through mid-May in employment.  The other one that wasn’t was the small business one 
from Homebase that was also showing an increase between April and May. 
So, clearly, in retrospect we should have put more weight on the ADP data, and, looking 
at our forecast for June, in fact, we are.  So, again, at the time we were balancing different things, 
and we were way off, but not quite as far off as most private-sector forecasters. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Can I just do a very quick follow-up?  I presume we should be taking 
some signal from this.  What signal are you taking from this? 
MR. WASCHER.  So, as Stacey mentioned, we basically assumed that the huge increase 
we had expected in June, which was like 9 million in the Tealbook, came in May—or a bunch, 
2.5 million of it, came in May.  So we’re expecting another 2.5 million increase in June, another 
3.5 million increase in July.  So we basically viewed most of this as a shift in timing, that the 
rebound occurred a little earlier than we were expecting.  And I think the ADP numbers we’ve 
seen since mid-May seem pretty consistent with the 2.5 million that we’re expecting in the June 
report, which would be for the week of June 12.  This week, in fact. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thanks.  President Evans. 
June 9–10, 2020
90 of 270


 
 
 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ve got two questions, I guess.  They’re labor 
related, so I guess maybe they’ll go to Bill, but however you want to divvy them up. 
The first one is on chart 18, “Unemployment Rate,” under the second wave.  It was 
sparked by President Barkin’s question as I saw that longer return of unemployment to come 
down.  I was thinking, this must be a scenario in which it’s more like the recovery from 2010 
after the great financial crisis, when long-term unemployment went up a lot, short-term 
unemployment not so much, and there was a scarring effect if you’d been out of the workforce 
for a long period of time.  So I guess the question is, is that the type of phenomenon you have in 
mind?  And maybe you could talk a little bit about that. 
The other one is on the “Natural Rate of Unemployment” chart, number 11.  And I’ve got 
an idea my staff is going to yell at me for this question, but this change in the natural rate of 
unemployment—when we talked about it before, I did not find this concept to be particularly 
helpful in this context.  And the way I think Stacey was describing it, I began to think that this is 
a way of sort of aligning your wage forecast so that it doesn’t go down on you as you have very 
high unemployment.  And if you didn’t make this adjustment you’d be expecting wages to fall in 
a counterfactual way.  So it’s a little bit more of a bookkeeping alignment issue. 
I say it that way because, do you really feel this is likely to be a persistent assessment of a 
higher natural rate of unemployment, or is it a little bit more of a forecasting kind of thing?  That 
would make me have to take this even more seriously than—I do, but it strikes me as a little bit 
of a—you have to do a very serious forecast.  I don’t do the same thing.  And I would do exactly 
what you’re doing too, I presume.  But if you could help me think that one through, I would 
appreciate it. 
June 9–10, 2020
91 of 270


 
 
 
MR. WASCHER.  On the second wave, I think you’re right.  I think, as Stacey noted, 
we’ve built in more supply-side damage.  And some of that supply-side damage would come in 
the form of a higher natural rate, as there’s more long-term unemployment and permanent job 
loss, and we know that that takes longer to go away.  So part of the reason that the decline is 
slower in the “Second Waves” scenario is, in fact, that we have built in a more persistent 
increase in the natural rate of unemployment in that scenario. 
On the other question on our assumptions about the natural rate, again, as Stacey noted, 
we were trying to figure out how to split up supply and demand factors, in terms of the 
mandatory closures and shutdowns and so forth.  And our view was that, if workers are 
prevented from going to work because of shutdowns, that should be a reduction in labor 
supply—which implied an increase in the natural rate. 
I kind of agree with you that, in some sense, it’s a forecasting tool because we don’t think 
that the high unemployment rate is going to cause additional weakness in wage and price 
inflation.  And, as you can see, the natural rate comes down pretty quickly as the social-
distancing restrictions are anticipated to ease.  And so by the end of the year, it’s down toward 
6 percent or a little more.  And that represents more of what we think is going on, in terms of the 
damage associated with permanent job loss from this episode and the need for industry to sort of 
restructure their businesses and so forth. 
I don’t know if that answers your question, but, basically, it’s a judgment, and it’s a 
judgment based on our view of how mandatory restrictions are affecting labor supply. 
MR. EVANS.  Yes, if I could, I’d say that your second answer got very directly at what I 
was thinking about.  And, you’re right, it is coming down quickly.  I think one thing that I 
worried about in the earlier episode is, many participants held onto this idea that the natural rate 
June 9–10, 2020
92 of 270


 
 
 
of unemployment was going to remain high—in my opinion, long beyond when that seemed 
reasonable.  So, at any rate, having a conversation about that is useful. 
If I could just clarify, I don’t think I heard you say that the second-wave increase in 
unemployment would be related to long-term unemployment.  I think you slipped in that the 
natural rate of unemployment would be higher.  When you say the natural rate of unemployment 
is higher, is that short term and long term?  I was going after the fact that there’s a dichotomy 
between the people who are really scarred and out of employment for a long period of time.  
That’s really more dire. 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes, that’s what I meant to say, that there’s an increase in long-term 
unemployment associated with the second wave, more permanent job loss, and that leads us to 
include a higher natural rate in that scenario.  But that’s right. 
MR. EVANS.  Okay, thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  I’m okay.  Charlie asked a follow-up on the natural rate, so I’m good, 
thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  If there are no further questions, let’s go to the economic 
round, and we’ll begin with President Rosengren, please. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Massachusetts COVID-19 hospitalizations 
have fallen significantly from their peak.  Significant challenges persist.  As of last week, 
1,600 people were hospitalized for COVID-19 in Massachusetts.  Five hospitals were still on 
surge capacity.  And deaths were between 40 and 50 people a day. 
The state has started a phased reopening, with quantitative metrics determining the timing 
of the progression through the sequence of phases.  The state has just declared the start of 
June 9–10, 2020
93 of 270


 
 
 
phase 2 that allows nonessential businesses to restart.  Unfortunately, given new measured 
infections of around 400 a day in Massachusetts over the past week, the path to contact tracing 
and the end of community transmission is not in sight.  As a result, people are likely to remain 
cautious, and the recovery and economic activity will continue to face headwinds. 
I also take relatively little solace in the May employment report.  Layoffs from 
mandatory shutdowns followed by earlier openings than expected or recommended by many 
epidemiologists may improve reported payrolls temporarily, but likely will increase the 
probability of the Tealbook’s “Second Waves” scenario.  In fact, given the poor public health 
performance so far in containing the virus in the United States, the Tealbook’s “Second Waves” 
alternative scenario is closer to my base case, with the Tealbook’s baseline forecast closer to my 
optimistic scenario. 
Indeed, I expect the national unemployment rate to end the year still in double digits.  
The early restart of the economy combined with the high probability of multiple waves of the 
coronavirus—according to many epidemiologists—and still-inadequate contact tracing and 
testing capabilities will likely result in regional shutdowns to prevent overwhelming hospitals.  
This likely will then lead to rising business failures and the tightening of credit.  It will also 
result in more distress for minority populations already disproportionately affected by the 
pandemic. 
Note that this is not my pessimistic case.  Seven of the eight major pandemics since the 
1700s had a substantial second peak.  All three of these pandemics that started in the spring—the 
1918 Spanish flu, the 1957–58 Asian flu, and the 2009–10 H1N1 pandemic—had a second 
fall– winter wave that was much worse than the first spring wave.  Thus, if the current pandemic 
June 9–10, 2020
94 of 270


 
 
 
follows the patterns of these other major pandemics, the Tealbook’s “Second Waves” scenario 
may even be too optimistic. 
Regarding data that provides information on foot traffic to 6 million points of interest by 
tracking cellphones, the behavior by individuals across states is strikingly different.  In 
Massachusetts, where the economy is now only slowly reopening, nonessential retail and 
restaurant visits are down dramatically and do not look much different now than in the middle of 
March.  In contrast, a state like South Carolina has seen visits to nonessential retail 
establishments and restaurants rise dramatically following their initial decline in March and 
especially since the early reopening of the state’s economy.  Indeed, visits to these locations are 
only somewhat lower now than their pre-shutdown level. 
Higher-frequency expenditure data show a pattern similar to the mobility numbers, with 
spending in many southern states that reopened earlier rebounding more than in states in the 
Northeast and West.  Whether Massachusetts or South Carolina fares better will depend 
importantly on the progress of the pandemic.  In fact, evidence is already emerging that new 
cases in South Carolina are rising, though from a much lower base. 
If there are significant flare-ups in states that have aggressively reopened, the reduction in 
social distancing that helps economic performance in such states now may translate to more 
depressed economic activity and increase public health issues in those states in the future.  And 
given the U.S. population’s ability to travel, any region that does not socially distance effectively 
and suffers increased rates of infection will likely export their public health problems to other 
regions of the country that are tourist sites, transportation hubs, or educational centers. 
If the pandemic subsides, however, ex post, Massachusetts will seem to have been too 
restrictive.  But given the death toll of the virus even with the economic lockdown, reopening too 
June 9–10, 2020
95 of 270


 
 
 
fast and relaxing social distancing too much are risks that I believe are not worth taking.  States 
in the Northeast, with their large numbers of private and public colleges and universities, are also 
grappling with the appropriate strategy for classes in the fall.  Even in Boston, where the 
response to COVID-19 has been quite conservative, the inflow of students from across the 
country and the world means that success against the pandemic now may be offset if the influx 
of students in the fall rekindles the public health problems. 
It is striking to date how different the strategies are across institutions, perhaps because of 
the lack of state or federal guidance.  Some colleges are staggering classes, others are online, still 
others are reopening with plans to do much more testing and tracing.  However, the mobility of 
students and the close contact involved in living and studying on a college campus may be an 
important vector of infection in the fall. 
Again, the problem with the more rapid opening in the absence of appropriate public 
health precautions is that such policies will likely result in a more severe second wave of the 
coronavirus in the future.  Even if a second wave of the virus occurs, with less severe public 
health outcomes, the economic effect could be larger than what we have seen to date, because of 
the economy’s increased fragility after the first wave. 
It is too soon to know whether the worst of the pandemic is over.  My baseline outlook is 
that resurgent pockets of infection will cause significantly diminished economic performance 
over this year.  This highlights the need to carefully monitor the data and do what we can to 
reduce the financial spillover from this public health emergency.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Clarida, please. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  The U.S. economic outlook is broadly 
unchanged since our April meeting, but, alas, uncertainty about that outlook is also unchanged 
June 9–10, 2020
96 of 270


 
 
 
and remains extreme.  Macroeconomic analysis is often based on tracing through the 
transmission of unobserved exogenous shocks to activity and inflation.  But one of the few things 
that we are not uncertain about today is the very real observed shock that caused the recession 
that the economy entered in March—the coronavirus pandemic and the appropriate public health 
policies put in place to contain it. 
This downturn will almost certainly feature in the current quarter the steepest decline in 
U.S. activity since World War II, and it’s already recorded the highest unemployment rate since 
the Great Depression.  It has also already featured the sharpest decline in core CPI inflation since 
the inception of that series in 1957. 
But while official economic data have been mostly awful since our April meeting—with, 
of course, Friday’s employment report the notable exception—financial markets are functioning 
well after the extreme turbulence and dysfunction we observed in March and, across many 
sectors, are serving their essential role of intermediating flows of saving and investment among 
borrowers and lenders. 
Bank credit lines are providing liquidity to companies large and small, and corporations 
rated both investment grade and high yield are able to issue and do so in size  in the corporate 
bond market.  I believe, and most outside observers agree, that this easing of financial conditions 
is at least in part the direct consequence of economic policy decisions taken since then, including 
our actions that are obviously well known to us, including importantly the launching and 
announcement of nine new facilities. 
Of course, this easing of financial conditions and associated restoration of credit flows is 
welcome.  We do not know how durable it is.  But, at a minimum, the easing of financial 
conditions is buying some time until the economy can begin to recover.  But as many of us 
June 9–10, 2020
97 of 270


 
 
 
pointed out in April, and it’s still true today, what today is mostly a problem of illiquidity may at 
some point morph into a problem of insolvency, which monetary policy is not suited to address 
under our existing structure. 
Now, each of us for the SEP round faced the challenge of cobbling together a baseline 
outlook and forming a judgment about the balance of risks.  And as was the case going into our 
April meeting, I found the staff’s analysis and their marshaling of evidence to be persuasive.  
And, indeed, my SEP projections for growth, inflation, and unemployment are broadly in line 
with the staff baseline—actually, closer to the April baseline. 
So I’m somewhat skewed to the upside for growth this year and to the downside for 
unemployment compared with the staff, but only at the margin.  But I do agree with the staff and 
I think most, if not all, of you that even with some good luck on the course of the virus and an 
upside surprise on the trajectory of the economic rebound, the economy is very unlikely to return 
to the level of activity attained at the 2019 fourth-quarter peak until late in 2021 at the earliest, 
and possibly in 2022. 
And if past cycles are any guide, it will likely take some considerable period after that for 
the unemployment rate to fall below 5 percent, let alone reach our estimates of u*.  So, as in 
April, I project a staggeringly steep collapse in activity in the first half of this year followed by a 
recovery that commences in the third quarter.  If this more-or-less consensus forecast is 
correct—and, indeed, all of the outside forecasters reported in the Tealbook did show a rebound 
commencing in the third quarter—it would imply that this will not only be a very deep recession 
under the baseline, but also a very brief recession.  Indeed, at five months—March through July, 
for example—it would be shortest recession on record. 
June 9–10, 2020
98 of 270


 
 
 
Of course, even if the economic rebound does commence in July, for the millions of 
Americans who remain and likely will remain unemployed beyond our 2022 forecast horizon, 
their recession, to paraphrase Ronald Reagan, will continue regardless of what decisions the 
NBER makes on dating the business cycle. 
Unfortunately, as we’ve heard from several of you, including President Rosengren, there 
are other far worse scenarios that are not only possible but plausible, and, of course, we’re 
talking about the “Second Waves” scenarios.  That said, and with the usual disclaimer that I am 
not an epidemiologist, I do wonder if the “Second Waves” scenario we focus on could at some 
point benefit from adding an alt-C to complement the alt-A “Depression” scenario we include.  
For example, one could at least consider a scenario in which second-wave infections are 
geographically concentrated in one or several metropolitan areas that lead to a shelter-in-place 
policy in those areas but do not shut down the entire economy for three months. 
I also fully agree with the staff’s judgment that the COVID-19 shock will be 
disinflationary, not inflationary.  I don’t think there’s really any doubt about that anymore.  We 
don’t have that many hard data points since February, but the record decline in core CPI for 
April is certainly consistent with this view.  The staff’s projected decline in core PCE inflation to 
1 percent this year is, to me, sobering but not unrealistic, given the paths of the output gap and 
the unemployment rate that I project.  Notwithstanding robust and timely monetary and fiscal 
policy support, the plausible best-case scenario we confront features an output gap of perhaps 
4 percent of GDP at least persisting into 2022 and significant slack in the labor market lasting 
longer. 
To conclude:  We entered this recession with core PCE running below our 2 percent 
objective for virtually the entire span of the previous economic expansion.  And with many 
June 9–10, 2020
99 of 270


 
 
 
measures of inflation expectations drifting lower into a range that some of us consider barely 
consistent with our mandate, I believe that an unwelcome and difficult-to-reverse decline in 
inflation expectations is a significant risk we will face, and assessing and countering that risk and 
making sure we don’t end up with an ECB problem should be an important priority for our future 
outlook and policy discussions.  Thank you, Chair Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly, please.  
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Like many other areas in the United States, 
communities throughout the 12th District have been struggling to survive the economic fallout 
from the pandemic.  In recent weeks, this challenge in our area has been intensified by horrific 
images of racism and injustice, which have resulted in very justifiable outrage. 
This has further challenged an already depressed economic environment.  Walking 
around many of the District’s major cities that we have, you see closed businesses, boarded-up 
shops, and a growing number of “For Lease” signs.  This is all giving a sense that even if the 
virus and the outrage diminish, the underlying distress will remain, as others have mentioned. 
Against this backdrop, none of my contacts expect a V-shaped recovery.  That is behind 
us in their mind.  The conversations have all turned to whether the recovery will be slow but 
steady or protracted and volatile.  Like President Rosengren mentioned, many of my contacts 
saw the employment report and started to worry that the early openings that created that 
surprising number may actually increase the chances of us needing a broad shelter-in-place 
action once again throughout the United States. 
So if you put all of this together, my contacts, to a person, expect it to take some time and 
additional policy stimulus to put the economy once again on a good footing.  The shape of the 
recovery, of course, will in large part—maybe all parts—be determined by the path of the virus, 
June 9–10, 2020
100 of 270


 
 
 
which is our critical unknown.  In this situation, it’s hard to provide a single modal outlook.  But 
because the SEP requires one, here is mine. 
I expect a historically large drop in GDP in the second quarter that is only partly offset by 
a bounceback in late 2020 and in 2021.  And given the persistent sizable output gap, I expect 
inflation to rise only to 1.6 percent by the end of 2022.  And I see the risks to this outlook as 
heavily tilted to the downside.  Should a second wave of the virus materialize, the resulting 
containment steps could derail the recovery before it has gained much momentum. 
Even in the best-case scenario with no second wave, I expect it to take considerable time 
to return to full employment and price stability.  And the longer it takes, the more tempting it 
will be to regard the resulting damage to the economy as related to structural factors rather than 
cyclical factors.  We started to get a sense of that already just a minute ago when we were 
debating the short-run unemployment rate and whether that turns into a long-run unemployment 
rate.  So I think this is a relevant thing to begin talking about now. 
I raise it now because this cyclical versus structural debate arose in the years following 
the Great Recession.  I was in San Francisco as a staff researcher at the time, and I remember 
many long discussions about whether the significant dislocation of workers and the buildup of 
the pool of long-term unemployed would result in permanent damage to the labor market that 
would prevent a return to pre-recession levels of unemployment and labor force participation. 
And I say this not meaning to be jovial or joking about it, but, of course, while that 
debate that we were having was taking place, the unemployment rate was falling, eventually 
reaching a 50-year low despite a rising labor force participation rate.  So it’s just useful to think 
about this and to say that despite the tremendous dislocation and disruption in our economy and 
June 9–10, 2020
101 of 270


 
 
 
the likelihood that the virus will leave a lasting imprint on how and where we work, I am holding 
my estimates of potential growth and longer-run unemployment unchanged. 
But we will, in part—and that would be us here in addition to fiscal agents—determine 
where these longer-run variables end up.  As Dave Reifschneider; Bill Wascher, who is on the 
phone; and David Wilcox argued just a few years ago, when faced with potential supply-side 
damage arising from sustained weak demand, increased monetary policy accommodation helps 
the cyclical downturn.  It stops it from becoming a long-lasting structural scarring.  Hence, 
appropriate monetary policy in my projection involves aggressive policy support past the relief 
stage and well into the recovery stage of the current cycle. 
Aggressive policy support is also necessary if we’re to escape from our low-inflation 
difficulty.  Last year we were hoping for a positive inflation shock that would pull us out of the 
decade-long experience of below-target inflation.  Instead, we have undeniably been hit by a 
deflationary downdraft that pushes us even further from our price-stability goal.  I will discuss 
the importance of forestalling supply-side damage and achieving both sides of our dual mandate 
tomorrow in my policy statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker, please. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The staff forecast reflects accurately the historic 
decline in second-quarter output.  Even with Friday’s unexpected good news, I remain a little 
more pessimistic than the Tealbook baseline regarding the pace of the recovery.  My own view is 
that structural change and dislocations accelerated by the virus will prevent the recovery from 
being quite as vigorous as outlined in the Tealbook.  I, therefore, anticipate a recovery that will 
be fairly strong but a bit more gradual, with second-half GDP growing at about 12 percent, 
further growth of 5 percent in 2021, and growth tapering off to 3 percent in 2022. 
June 9–10, 2020
102 of 270


 
 
 
Friday’s labor market report may indicate that the unemployment rate has actually peaked 
and could decline to around 9 percent by year-end.  I then project that it will gradually decline to 
6 percent at the end of 2022, as the difficult task of job reallocation continues.  My inflation 
forecast envisions inflation of around 1 percent this year, with the inflation rate gradually rising 
to 1.5 percent at the end of the forecast horizon.  So, given this outlook, I do not anticipate any 
need for moving away from the ELB over the forecast horizon.  My outlook is predicated on no 
second wave of the virus and some further extensions of existing fiscal stimulus as well as some 
fine-tuning of existing programs, as we have already started to see. 
Also, I envision that more aid will be directed toward state and local governments, with 
another perhaps trillion dollars being legislated.  I’m an optimist.  Of course, as everyone 
recognizes, considerable uncertainty surrounds all forecasts.  It is difficult to know how 
permanent many of the current economic dislocations will be, and, of course, the path of the 
virus will define what the path of the economy is.  Information I’m receiving from the Third 
District contacts, our high-frequency data on consumer finance, and the various surveys being 
conducted by our research teams lead me to believe, at least for now, the worst may be 
behind us. 
Regarding credit and debit card usage, it appears that much of the March–April decline 
was reversed by the week ending June 3.  Relative to one year ago, we’re actually witnessing a 
1.5 percent increase in total card purchases, although credit card purchases remain somewhat 
depressed.  Even so, there has been a notable improvement in spending across a variety of 
categories, as we saw earlier.  Card expenditures on food and drugs are up 33 percent relative to 
a year ago, while travel expenditures have fallen 61 percent. 
June 9–10, 2020
103 of 270


 
 
 
There’s also evidence of what my staff has deemed the “Harker effect” that I mentioned 
in our April meeting, with spending on home improvement rising 35 percent relative to a year 
ago.  I fixed almost everything there is to fix in my house.  Notably, the relative gains have been 
driven by improvements in categories that had been weak since mid-March.  These categories 
include expenditures on automotive goods, general retail and professional services, health care, 
and telecoms and utilities.  We’re also seeing a relationship between ATM withdrawals and 
economic shutdowns.  Relative to a year ago, ATM withdrawals at the end of May were down 
17 percent in Philadelphia, but only 5 to 7 percent in Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston. 
Adding to the evidence that we are starting to see economic improvements is the fact that 
75 percent of the surveyed workforce is working offsite or remotely, with only 4.6 percent 
reporting their firm is permanently closed.  Those reporting that a COVID-19-related event is 
preventing them from working stands at a 2.7 percent rate.  There are, however, disparities 
across income classes, with 28 percent of those earning less than $40,000 reporting they were 
furloughed and only 8.5 percent of those earning over $125,000 reporting a similar outcome. 
In May, 58 percent of respondents reported they expect their future consumption to 
increase over the next 90 days compared with 43 percent giving that indication just in April.  
Creditors do not appear to be closing accounts or lines of credit, and both adverse action letters 
and delinquencies are down compared with a similar period in 2019.  It does appear that the 
financial system is treating the pandemic as it would any other natural disaster.  However, there 
is little appetite for extending new access to credit, and credit standards have indeed tightened. 
With respect to the region’s labor market, as elsewhere, unemployment insurance claims 
are unprecedented.  Additionally, 222,000 workers have left the labor force.  Job losses were 
especially severe in the region’s travel and hospitality industries and in construction.  
June 9–10, 2020
104 of 270


 
 
 
Manufacturing, although declining, has fared somewhat better, and our regional survey actually 
showed a modest improvement in May, although the index remains well below its recessionary 
average. 
The future activity index remains in positive territory, however, which is indeed 
consistent with the anecdotal evidence I’m hearing.  For example, a large, well-diversified 
manufacturer in the region reports very few order cancellations, with most orders just being 
delayed.  In fact, his September order book has recently risen by 7 percent.  His firm is also 
increasing inventories in those items that he has confidence he can easily sell in the future, and 
he wants to be ready to meet the anticipated release of pent-up demand.  Also, with air-freight 
costs rising by as much as 800 percent, his firm is moving freight through the ocean, which 
requires them to have more inventory on hand.  So he is building inventory. 
Before closing, in my role as the chair of CRPICA, I would like to take the opportunity to 
mention briefly some of the work being done at the Philadelphia Fed and across the Federal 
Reserve System dealing with racial inequities in our economy.  In recent weeks, we have been 
made acutely aware of the pain that these inequalities and injustices have caused our fellow 
Americans, especially those who are already economically disadvantaged.  Thus, it’s important 
that we do not lose sight of the economic, health, and other disparities that plague our society. 
In order to ensure the economic downturn does not amplify the already existing 
disparities, we have to consider ways to reduce them.  This is why the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia launched a series in April called Equity and Recovery and examined the workers, 
businesses, and neighborhoods most affected by COVID-19.  We know that the recent economic 
downturn has disproportionately affected the poorest and most vulnerable among us, and many 
June 9–10, 2020
105 of 270


 
 
 
of those communities are composed of people of color.  The work of the Philly Fed concentrates 
on ways to invest strategically in the people and places that are most affected. 
As we “pivot” toward reopening, we are working with local groups to provide for an 
equitable recovery.  We know that this means addressing racial disparities and working with 
those who have been hardest hit economically, both now and before the crisis.  The Bank is 
helping by convening conferences and through various research publications put out by our 
community development group and the research department. 
Now, this work is also being conducted and amplified throughout the Federal Reserve 
System, and it is coordinated by the Racial Equity Learning Community, or RELC.  That 
includes members of all Banks and staff members at the Board.  CRPICA will be working with 
RELC to make sure that their efforts are not only successful, but widely known inside and 
outside the Fed and able to help our fellow citizens have the opportunity to participate in and to 
benefit from the recovery.  Therefore, as we make our policy decisions, I hope we can remain 
cognizant of the disparate economic effect that is absolutely hitting our communities all across 
the country. 
So, lastly, returning to the macroeconomy, let me sum up by noting that we are seeing 
some glimmers of very gradual improvement in certain segments of the Third District economy, 
and I anticipate a steady but not overly vigorous recovery beginning by perhaps the latter part of 
this month.  But the virus has accelerated many structural changes in the economy, and it will 
take time for firms and consumers to adjust.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  It is 3:01 p.m.  We’re going to take a short break, and 
we’ll resume at 3:20 p.m. sharp.  Thank you. 
[Coffee break] 
June 9–10, 2020
106 of 270


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Bostic, please. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’m glad everyone’s doing all right.  Over this 
FOMC cycle, my team and I have devoted considerable effort to try to find elements of clarity in 
the fog of uncertainty that hangs over our nation.  Through countless hours of meetings, 
discussions, and analysis of data, a few major punchlines have emerged. 
First, consistent with an observation in the staff briefing, the relief have had a major 
positive effect.  Second, while a large percentage of the jobs currently reported as lost are likely 
to return, permanent job losses will be sizable.  Third, substantial downside risks remain.  And, 
fourth, the recent bubbling over of long-standing frustration associated with systemic racism in 
American society, while much needed and a cause for long-run optimism, has the potential to 
further jolt the economy in the short run. 
Let me tell the story behind each of these headlines.  The introduction of the pandemic 
triggered a massive policy response that provided many forms of relief to the American 
economy.  The evidence coming in suggests that these packages have achieved their objective.  
The staff briefing on financial developments today documented the positive effect of Federal 
Reserve policies. 
Many Sixth District business contacts, including a number of minority-owned businesses, 
reported that Paycheck Protection Program support was instrumental in keeping them open and 
their payrolls close to normal.  On the consumer side, data have clearly shown the positive 
benefits of the Economic Impact Payments and unemployment insurance benefits.  As one 
example of this last point, use of rent and mortgage forbearance options has remained much 
lower than expected. 
June 9–10, 2020
107 of 270


 
 
 
Regarding jobs, last week’s jobs report offered some surprisingly positive news about 
employment and labor markets.  And data from other sources also suggest the rebound is well 
under way.  Transaction data from a major credit card network for the second half of May 
indicated that retail sales excluding autos returned to levels on a pace with a year-ago spending, a 
strong recovery from year-over-year spending drops of up to 30 percent in late March. 
It is important to note, however, that spending remains very uneven across retail 
categories.  Just as we saw a surge in grocery spending in the first half of March at the start of 
the coronavirus pandemic, we are now seeing a broader-based Harker effect:  a surge in spending 
at home-improvement stores as the economy reopens.  The spending is up 40 percent year-over-
year for these stores.  And Pat, I will tell you, I still have a few projects left at my house, so if 
you’re looking for things to do, you can come down to Atlanta.  We got work for you. 
In contrast to the elevated spending in some sectors, spending on apparel, jewelry, 
restaurants, and lodging is recovering at a much slower pace and from a much deeper hole.  
Further, the gradual reopening has sparked a revival of economic activity in many locations.  
This is especially true during the Memorial Day weekend for so-called drive-to vacation 
destinations, such as the Gulf Coast and the Tennessee mountains. 
A number of businesses in these tourism markets reported that they are already back up 
to full or nearly full capacity, with strong demand for overnight lodging rentals and 
campgrounds, and demand is particularly strong for casinos.  Mississippi casinos took in 
17 percent more during Memorial Day weekend compared with a year ago despite operating at 
50 percent capacity.  Of course, it may not be the most surprising news that casino patrons have 
come out in force, given that they are likely skewed toward the risk-taking side of the spectrum.  
June 9–10, 2020
108 of 270


 
 
 
I interpret these as a sign that the recovery of lost jobs is under way.  And I must confess that 
evidence that we may be past the trough has appeared sooner than I expected. 
That said, the recent data have not materially changed my outlook.  I’m still not 
expecting the trajectory of the recovery to be steep and believe many bumps may be ahead.  The 
reason for this is growing evidence that many jobs will not be coming back.  A national lender 
with a large small-business-loan portfolio reported that many of their smallest clients—
businesses with less than 10 employees, which typically have very small margins for error—have 
closed for good, and that many of the remaining ones of that size are at great risk of closing.  In 
addition, the COVID-19 crisis might be the tipping point for many larger firms that were 
struggling pre-crisis.  We have already seen bankruptcies from a number of these firms, and I 
anticipate that we will see more in coming weeks. 
We have also heard from contacts that many firms are actively engaged in exploring 
changes to their business models that may result in a reduction in the number of workers needed.  
This is akin to the structural changes that President Daly highlighted in her remarks.  A majority 
of contacts described decisions about staffing levels as demand dependent, so the sluggish 
recovery of demand projected for many industries will likely force firms to adjust their staffing 
models as they seek to remain viable. 
And we are also hearing an increasing number of comments that firms are unlikely to 
return fully to their pre-COVID-19 office staffing structure.  The increase thus far in usage of 
work-from-home employment has been significant, and firms indicate that they plan to make 
some of these new arrangements permanent. 
Survey data from the Survey of Business Uncertainty and the American Time Use Survey 
both indicated that about 5 percent of paid working days occurred at home before the 
June 9–10, 2020
109 of 270


 
 
 
coronavirus.  But when businesses were asked in the May SBU what will work from home look 
like after the pandemic, they indicated a threefold increase in expected paid working days at 
home, moving from 5 percent to 15 percent. 
Consistent with this survey evidence, one large organization in Tennessee with more than 
6,000 employees noted that, given the success of having 60 percent of their highly skilled staff 
currently working from home, they believe that 10 to 20 percent of these jobs will be reclassified 
as permanent telework jobs.  And a regional children’s hospital and private ambulance service 
covering four southeastern states canceled a $10 million parking lot construction project and a 
$2 million office construction project as a result of shifting a sizable portion of employees to 
work-from-home arrangements. 
So increased usage of work-from-home arrangements not only implies a significant 
change in the structure of the workplace, but also a potentially large decline in demand for 
commercial real estate.  This does not bode well for construction and CRE loan portfolios.  In 
addition to these structural shifts, I also see a number of downside risks that have the potential to 
further slow the pace of economic recovery.  The first two risks relate to the government relief 
effort. 
While initial relief programs have been largely successful, some potential beneficiaries 
were missed, including small businesses that did not have the administrative capacity to take 
advantage of the relief or have had negative past experiences with banks in their communities.  
We are hearing from nonprofits across the District that demand among low- and moderate-
income populations for social services and financial assistance continues to increase at a 
dramatic pace.  And while these nonprofits highlight their current stresses, they are even more 
June 9–10, 2020
110 of 270


 
 
 
worried about what type of support will be needed for basic needs when the current federal relief 
program ends in June and July. 
When the direct payments are spent, the PPP program concludes, and UI benefits expire, 
there is a risk that the legs supporting the recovery will be kicked out if demand does not recover 
to a sufficient level to support business activity, and the economy will weaken from a second 
deceleration in demand. 
Another downside risk is related to the coronavirus itself.  I am concerned about how the 
virus will progress when economies are opening or fully back open.  Now, President Rosengren 
kicked us off about this, but I’m pretty sure that among this Committee he is far from alone on 
this concern.  A related concern is the effect of the coronavirus on the psyche of consumers and 
businesses.  I continue to hear coronavirus concerns from a significant share of consumers and 
employers.  When will their fears recede?  What will trigger that calming down?  Will it require 
a vaccine, or will it be both testing and contact tracing? 
An additional limiting factor is that the economic hit on businesses, nonprofits, and 
municipalities to this point may constrain their ability to take the needed steps for testing and, 
ultimately, survival.  As an example, a president of a midsize private university in our District 
highlighted the range of struggles that the institution is facing.  It furloughed 40 percent of its 
staff, of which 10 percent have now been fired, and cut pay, including for executive leadership 
and tenured faculty. 
Its survival in the fall depends on the revenues associated with on-campus classes, 
activities, and residential living.  But this will require ensuring a safe return for all.  This will 
necessitate campuswide COVID-19 testing at an estimated price tag of $1.1 million per semester.  
Right now, this is more than they can afford.  So they are considering several strategies, such as 
June 9–10, 2020
111 of 270


 
 
 
using mobile apps for contact tracing and designating an on-campus housing facility as a 
quarantine facility so that they can possibly avoid a campus shutdown from a few positive tests.  
But it is not clear today whether the university will find a feasible COVID-19 campus model that 
allows them to continue operations. 
A final downside risk to highlight relates to a tightening of credit quality standards.  And 
as others have discussed this one, and I’m guessing more of you will, I will just say “Plus one” to 
all of that.  Now, these downsides all existed before the race-based turbulence that has racked 
communities across the nation.  As noted by President Daly, these protests, as well as the 
breakouts of occasional violence, also have the potential to adversely affect the fortune of 
businesses, families, governments, and nonprofits.  So the ongoing pain may be compounded by 
these developments. 
But that said, no one should interpret these remarks to mean that the turbulence is 
unjustified or that it might not ultimately be a long-term positive.  Systemic racism has been and 
continues to be a weight holding down the economy in its own right.  By constraining the 
opportunities of African Americans and other ethnic minorities, systemic racism diminishes the 
long-term potential of the economy.  If the turbulence can trigger needed change and a reduction 
of those constraints, this country can wind up better off.  In my view, the urgent call for reforms 
to create a more inclusive society and economy is an imperative we should not ignore or reject. 
Now, I am pleased that the leaders and institutions of the Federal Reserve System have 
forcefully and directly declared their support of the principles underlying an inclusive society 
and economy and a commitment to be an agent of reform and change.  And System-level efforts, 
like the RELC group that President Harker mentioned, are good examples of new ways that we 
June 9–10, 2020
112 of 270


 
 
 
can move in this direction.  I look forward to working with each of you to make considerable 
progress toward this goal in the years ahead.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard, please. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me first say, I’m fully supportive of your 
proposed statement on George Floyd and nationwide protests.  I appreciate your leadership on 
behalf of the Federal Reserve System on this critical issue.  I think your statement will 
complement statements that you’ve made to the employees at the Board of Governors and that I 
believe all Banks have made to employees, and I’d echo Raphael Bostic here, and let’s hope this 
time we can encourage reforms that will eliminate systemic racism in the United States. 
Let me turn to my comments on the economy.  As the staff analysis and discussion have 
made clear today, this shock—we need to be always reminded—is very unlike others that have 
buffeted the U.S. economy in the postwar era.  Accordingly, we should be very careful not to 
analyze it in the same way as other shocks.  Especially because the unemployment insurance 
program is being used to provide pandemic relief, interpretation of the measured unemployment 
rate requires considerable care in the current circumstance. 
Normally, in a high-unemployment situation, only a relatively small fraction of the 
unemployed would describe themselves as “on temporary layoff.”  But, in the current 
circumstance, a very large fraction of the unemployed are describing themselves as on temporary 
layoff, at least for now, a stark contrast to ordinary recession dynamics. 
This indeed bodes well for the chances of a swift recovery in the current situation, 
provided the economic and health policy response continues to be managed effectively.  I 
continue to see the primary effect of the shock that we have encountered to be centered on the 
second quarter, which, by nearly all accounts, looks like it will be the worst quarter for real GDP 
June 9–10, 2020
113 of 270


 
 
 
growth of all time by a factor of 3 or 4.  Let us hope that April was the worst month of this 
downturn. 
I continue to see a gradual transition beginning in May and ending at the end of Q3.  The 
end of the third quarter will be another checkpoint because, by that point, the economy will 
likely have adjusted as much as it can in the short term to the reality of the COVID-19 mortality 
risk and the steps that must be taken to manage that risk effectively. 
Let me make just a brief remark on the 1957–58 pandemic.  That pandemic was arguably 
worse than today’s pandemic.  The total number of excess deaths relative to the population looks 
like it was worse than what’s projected today, at least by some models, I guess.  So it was a big 
human tragedy, but it did not appear to cause medium- or long-term economic damage.  The 
1960s, in particular, turned out to be an outstanding decade for growth for the U.S. economy.  So 
the idea that because there was a severe pandemic in 1957 and ’58 meant that the entire 1960s 
was lost isn’t what happened in economic terms. 
I would also point out that pandemics have not been considered in the academic literature 
to be key macro shocks, at least in the empirical literature.  Often we’d read the history of these 
periods, and the pandemic would not be mentioned.  Many other things would get mentioned as 
influencing the macroeconomic dynamics, but not pandemics.  They were pushed into the noise 
term in most empirical research.  There’s certainly a huge human tragedy, but I don’t think that 
they’ve typically been major macroeconomic events the way this one has been. 
Our goals in my mind are twofold and, I think, have been echoed here already today.  
Number one, support the financial sector to mitigate the risk of a financial crisis.  If we get a 
financial crisis on top of the pandemic shock, we’ll be in a much worse situation.  And, number 
two, support the real economy to mitigate the risk of depression.  We do have a “Depression” 
June 9–10, 2020
114 of 270


 
 
 
scenario in the Tealbook and elsewhere.  If we get major business failures occurring over the 
summer and into the fall, it will be very difficult to get the economy back on track. 
The policy response so far, in my judgment, has been very good.  It has three parts:  It has 
a health policy component, a fiscal policy component, and a monetary policy component.  The 
health policy component has been simple.  It is to ask workers in high-contact industries to stay 
home to mitigate health risk.  At the St. Louis Fed, early in this crisis, we estimated that 
47 million workers fit in this category and might be at risk.  As of today, I believe about 
43 million have tried to claim unemployment insurance or have claimed unemployment 
insurance over the weeks since the crisis began.  We’re asking these workers to invest in national 
health.  We’re deliberately slowing down the economy with the health policy.  It should not be 
surprising that we get terrible data by ordinary metrics but good data from the point of view of 
trying to get the pandemic under control. 
The second part has been fiscal policy, which, despite dysfunctional politics in the United 
States, has been very good, I think.  The workers and businesses that have been asked to shut 
down need to be compensated for this, and we’ve tried to design programs through the fiscal 
channel to do this. 
Among the most used are the unemployment insurance program, the PPP, and direct cash 
payments.  I would say that this use of unemployment insurance to provide pandemic relief 
probably means that unemployment is not quite what it seems, and the staff analysis seemed to 
talk about this to some degree. 
Also, the workers being kept on payroll through the PPP are also unemployed in an 
economic sense, but we’re not going to count them.  We’re going to think of that as pandemic 
June 9–10, 2020
115 of 270


 
 
 
relief.  So I think it becomes very hard to think about what is going on in terms of fiscal policy in 
traditional terms as if this is a traditional type of shock, which it is not. 
I also think that the size of the fiscal package was about right.  You know, very rough 
numbers would be about 10 percent of GDP.  Most forecasters now are saying that they do not 
think that GDP will be 10 percent lower in 2020.  So if our goal was only to provide insurance to 
displaced workers and firms, we have enough funds in the fiscal package.  I know it does depend 
on exactly how you tally up these totals on these fiscal packages. 
This is also not conventional stimulus.  We’re not trying, in my mind, to pull 
consumption into the second quarter.  We would like people to actually not consume that much 
in the second quarter:  Stay at home, lie low, and get the pandemic under control.  Then later 
there would be more opportunity for conventional stimulus. 
And, unfortunately, much of the popular narrative on this still calls what we’re doing 
stimulus.  It would actually be counterproductive to pull production into the second quarter when 
you’re trying to get firms to cool it and stay home and not produce during this period. 
The third part has been monetary policy—the Fed liquidity programs plus 
accommodative monetary policy by this Committee.  In my view, the financial sector is holding 
up relatively well so far.  I think there may be pockets for which you could make a case that that 
is not happening, but I found the liquidity metrics that we have very encouraging—again, at least 
so far. 
I think the shutdown-style policy was appropriate, as the initial shock hit when the 
knowledge of the disease was very limited, the contagious effects were largely unknown, the 
deadliness was largely unknown, and those who would be most at risk were largely unknown.  
But the shutdown policy is a blanket policy that cannot be maintained very long. 
June 9–10, 2020
116 of 270


 
 
 
Most business contacts that I talked to say that they can survive with no revenue for 
perhaps 90 to 120 days, but that there is essentially no pause button on the U.S. economy, and 
attempts to go too long with an inefficient-type policy of this sort risks a financial crisis, as I 
think it would become increasingly apparent that some firms can’t pay their credit bills.  It risks a 
depression scenario as many businesses start to fail, and I feel very strongly that if we get into a 
depression scenario, both outcomes will be worse:  Health outcomes will be worse, and 
economic outcomes will be worse.  So it’s worse on all dimensions, and there’s not really much 
question of a tradeoff there.  So there is significant downside risk here, as many have 
emphasized. 
But I’m going to give you hope for two solutions, which I think are occurring.  Before I 
get to that, I want to say that I do not think it’s appropriate to make policy counting on a vaccine.  
My reading of the possibility of a vaccine is that it could happen, but it also may never happen.  
There’s been no vaccine against this type of virus in the past.  It’s inappropriate to rely on this as 
a channel, and I think we should be making policy assuming no vaccine, and I would go further 
and say no therapeutic, either. 
Nevertheless, I think the economy is going to adapt in two different ways, so let me talk 
about that.  The two solutions, I think, are ubiquitous testing and a risk-based stay-at-home 
policy.  So let me talk about both of these.  The ubiquitous testing is—I would point to other 
economists, like Paul Romer and Larry Kotlikoff and my colleague on this Committee, Rob 
Kaplan.  I think there is some disconnect between the health-care community and the economist 
community on this issue. 
I think that from an economist’s perspective, the pandemic is a story about information 
economics, and we know from information economics that if information is asymmetric, the 
June 9–10, 2020
117 of 270


 
 
 
markets can break down completely.  So that’s exactly what happens here when two people try 
to trade, but they’re unaware whether the other one has the disease, so they don’t trade.  The way 
to fix that would be to make it so that everyone knows exactly who’s sick and who isn’t sick, and 
the way to do that would be to test, basically, everyone all the time or, if you can’t do that, then 
many people all the time.  So that suggests a relatively simple solution, which is to subsidize test 
production.  It’s easier to say that than to do that, but with the kinds of money that we are 
throwing around at this problem, hundreds of billions of dollars or trillions of dollars, you can do 
a lot of things that wouldn’t have been possible in other circumstances. 
Also, I think, for economists talking about testing, testing could be any kind of simple 
test that would give you some indication of whether the person you’re thinking about trading 
with has the disease.  So, for instance, I think taking temperatures is a form of testing, which I 
think a lot of us are probably going to do at our Banks or are doing at our Banks.  Or even asking 
people if they’ve been sick recently or if they’ve been near people that have been sick recently—
even that is a form of testing. 
So to the health-care world, that doesn’t sound like a test, but from an information 
economics perspective, that’s the way to gather information about whether the person you are 
about to trade with is likely to get you sick.  Now, we’d like that to be even better.  We’d like to 
have a really reliable and really quick way to tell whether the other person is sick, and that’s why 
we should subsidize test production, create a pop-up industry, and saturate the economy with 
tests. 
I think to the health-care world that sounds like a crazy idea, because they think of tests 
as something that are done in hospitals and need to be conserved and only the hospitals should be 
able to do these kinds of things.  But, from an economics perspective, that isn’t what we want.  
June 9–10, 2020
118 of 270


 
 
 
We want to fix the information problem in the economy.  The demand for simple widespread 
testing is overwhelming in the economy—overwhelming.  Every single firm would like to do 
this.  Every single family would like to do this.   
So I think, because of that, a lot of this is going to occur anyway, regardless of what any 
policymaker says.  The economy will simply start to produce tests of various kinds, as I’ve 
described, and will start doing it, and that is going to help us mitigate the spread of the disease 
and manage the mortality risk that we face that we did not face in the past when this disease was 
not among us. 
Now, let me talk for a moment about another thing that I think is happening in the 
economy and that is encouraging for the future, which is risk-based stay-at-home.  And here I 
would cite Daron Acemoglu and co-authors at MIT and their recent paper on heterogeneous 
households that are facing different risks from the disease. 
A risk-based policy would be that different people are going to recognize that they’re at 
risk of mortality risk from this disease, and they’re going to naturally want to protect themselves.  
Initially, when the pandemic hit, you couldn’t really do this, because you didn’t have much 
information about what the disease was or who was going to be most affected, but every day that 
goes by we get more and more information about who’s most at risk.  Those people will 
naturally pursue stay-at-home policies. 
Others who are much less at risk—and the risk does go down dramatically for younger 
people who don’t have other conditions—will make their own decision about how much risk 
they want to take.  But we can calibrate how much risk they will take by looking at accident risk.  
In the mortality tables, accidental injury is the third largest killer in the U.S. economy.  With 
June 9–10, 2020
119 of 270


 
 
 
very round numbers, it’s about 170,000 people per year, on par with the kinds of projections that 
are around for COVID-19 for 2020. 
We take all kinds of actions to try to mitigate accidental injury and mortality risk in the 
economy, so that’s evidence that the economy is perfectly capable of putting on seatbelts, driving 
cars with airbags, looking both ways when they cross the street.  All these things are the kinds of 
things that you do because if you don’t do them, you might get killed by accidental injury. 
And the same thing will happen with COVID-19—you’ll get all kinds of mitigating 
actions to cope with the risk that’s out there in the economy.  So it’s very different once you get 
three months or six months or nine months past the initial pandemic.  Initially, you’re unsure 
what’s happening.  You’re unsure what the disease is.  You’re unsure how contagious it is.  
You’re unsure who is most at risk.  But as time goes on, it becomes clearer and clearer as to what 
that is.  People naturally take actions to protect themselves. 
So households make their own risk-mitigation decisions.  Firms make their own risk-
mitigation decisions and try to provide safe workplaces and safe ways to provide their products.  
This is occurring in great detail all across the economy in many different ways.  This isn’t a 
matter of a government entity decreeing that this kind of thing should happen.  This is a natural 
response of the economy to a new mortality risk that wasn’t on the scene previously. 
So the bottom line is that economic actors of all types are adjusting to the new mortality 
risk that has exploded onto the global economy in the past several months.  As days and weeks 
go by, more is learned about the nature of this mortality risk and how it can be mitigated, as well 
as how goods and services can be provided safely in the face of this risk.  Risk mitigation can be 
undertaken at the individual level as well as at the firm level, and the result will likely be higher 
June 9–10, 2020
120 of 270


 
 
 
output as well as less fatalities than the economy initially experienced during the March–April 
2020 time frame. 
And the bottom line of the Acemoglu paper is that this kind of response of the economy 
dominates the shutdown response.  The shutdown response is a situation in which you have high 
fatalities and a poorly performing economy.  This will be a highly or better-performing economy 
with less fatalities because of the individual insurance undertaken by individual firms and 
households in the economy.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
CHAIR POWELL.  President Evans, please. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My business and nonprofit contacts continue to 
grapple with unprecedented challenges and uncertainty.  The effects of the shutdown have taken 
a great toll on the economy.  And like in the rest of the country, people gathered in large 
numbers across the Seventh District to express their outrage at the killing of George Floyd and 
pervasive racism in America.  In some places, peaceful protests were accompanied by violence 
and property destruction, and this has further intensified challenges for disadvantaged 
communities.  I certainly agree with Raphael Bostic and Mary Daly that needed change is 
essential in order to address these injustices. 
With states reopening, my contacts reported some tentative signals that the sharp 
downturn in activity may have reached a bottom.  In the auto sector, production and sales rose 
last month.  A major automaker noted they had become more optimistic when they first saw 
early May sales, and then the rest of the month they beat their positively revised expectations.  
Their latest outlook for 2020 has total vehicle sales of 12 million units. 
In the heavy-equipment sector, one manufacturer reported mixed activity.  Sales to 
agriculture are holding up well, while construction-related sales are badly hit.  Supply chain 
June 9–10, 2020
121 of 270


 
 
 
disruptions coming from Mexico and India continue to pose challenges and risks.  Still, the 
firm’s overall employment is down just 4.5 percent compared with last year.  One reason the 
decline is so small is that they are keeping extra staff on hand to offset elevated absenteeism.  
And one of my directors who runs a large manufacturing conglomerate said they had been able 
to keep about 95 percent of their global capacity operational, but this has taken a significant 
effort. 
Looking ahead, many manufacturers were gloomy.  One heavy-equipment producer 
highlighted the problems in energy and a dearth of demand from public infrastructure projects, 
given the fragility of state and local finances.  And a steelmaker warned about getting excited 
over a third-quarter pickup.  Even with a large gain relative to Q2, they still expect their Q3 
number to be down 20 percent from 2019 levels.  Others echoed this sentiment. 
Uncertainty was another common theme.  Businesses are considering a wide range of 
economic and public health scenarios, including the potential for a second wave of the disease.  
The disparate effects across scenarios are causing many to defer decisionmaking.  A few contacts 
said businesses were hoping to have more clarity about the recovery this fall and can make 
investment and employment adjustments then.  They cautioned that these could be bad.  For 
example, one airline executive reported that her firm would likely embark on significant layoffs 
in October. 
Improved financial conditions have allowed some of my business and nonprofit contacts 
to lock in liquidity, providing some welcome flexibility.  On a related note, our financial market 
contacts, as well as some from nonfinancial sectors, were united in their expectations that the 
Fed’s corporate bond, municipal lending, and Main Street lending facilities would see little 
June 9–10, 2020
122 of 270


 
 
 
demand, given their current terms and conditions.  Illinois, of course, is an exception.  So at the 
moment, they don’t see these facilities having a significant further effect on the real economy. 
Several of my directors described how they see the relaxation of stay-at-home orders 
playing out in their communities.  Uncertainty was an important theme here as well.  Some are 
taking a cautious approach.  But, frankly, others discussed activities that exceed what I would 
have expected based on public health recommendations.  I think the reports highlight an elevated 
risk of intermittent surges in the virus. 
One contact talked about universities’ plans to bring students and major college football 
back to campus.  That’s got to be an important topic down in the Southeast—right?—with the 
SEC and the ACC.  For example, Notre Dame is planning to have a football season with fans but 
perhaps limiting attendance to 30,000 rather than the usual 80,000.  And our contact said they 
will attempt to prohibit tailgating.  He was very skeptical of that.  [Laughter] 
Universities are planning to bring students back, and they expect them to follow social-
distancing protocols.  Some plan to start the fall semester earlier.  The term would finish by 
Thanksgiving, so students would not have to return until February for a similarly compressed 
spring.  So I suppose if they run into health challenges after Thanksgiving, they would run their 
course by February. 
I am reminded of the saying “People plan, God laughs.”  Maybe this will work.  Perhaps 
college students are more respectful of bureaucratic authority than I recall 40 years ago.  I do 
worry, though, that a seasonally driven decline in infections in the spring and summer, along 
with a strong desire to return to normal, could fool many into making decisions that could be 
cause for regret.  Then again, I could be wrong, and things could go better than I expect.  There 
is tremendous uncertainty.  
June 9–10, 2020
123 of 270


 
 
 
These themes also came up when I sat down with my staff to discuss Friday’s stronger-
than-expected labor market report and then to rework our SEP submission.  By the way, I will 
reveal that I am SEP number nine.  The May report showed that reopening is happening faster 
than we had anticipated.  Like the Tealbook update, we think this largely reflects a shift in 
activity from Q3 into Q2.  But we added somewhat more to our GDP projection for 2020 as a 
whole than the Tealbook update did. 
My outlook for 2020 now has real GDP falling 7 percent and the unemployment rate 
ending the year at 9.5 percent.  In our forecast we assume that growth is held back by 
intermittent, localized virus outbreaks, which might be made worse by the faster-than-expected 
reopening.  In this environment, many resources will be devoted to health and safety.  We 
assume a vaccine becomes widely available as we move through 2022, allowing for a return to 
more normal operations.   
I will take note of the comment that Jim made about, why should we assume that a 
vaccine becomes available?  And I certainly agree that there’s great uncertainty over that, 
especially given the experiences with different diseases and the flu and things like that.  I think it 
just seems to be one of those assumptions that you need to take a stand on for the forecast, and 
then you can think about the risks beyond that.  So I don’t view that as a critical feature, as long 
as we’re well positioned from a risk standpoint to deal with providing more accommodation if 
that’s what we find we have to do. 
We have the output gap closing to zero by the end of 2022.  At that time, our forecast has 
real GDP roughly 1 percentage point above its level in 2019:Q4.  The only reason the output gap 
is closed is because some previously expected trend growth over these three years has been 
permanently lost.  Of course, many risks and uncertainties remain, and the recent social unrest 
June 9–10, 2020
124 of 270


 
 
 
and increased polarization are unlikely to be neutral factors for the outlook.  I continue to see 
downside risks predominating. 
For inflation, some of the extreme price declines in March and April are likely behind us.  
On the other hand, the effects of soft aggregate demand could take some time to show through to 
stickier prices.  Putting these together, we have core PCE inflation for 2020 at 1.0 percent.  In 
looking ahead, the downward pressure on prices from resource slack should diminish in 2021 
and ’22.  If inflation expectations do not fall, this should support some modest increase in 
inflation in those years.  Our forecast has core PCE rising 1.4 percent in 2021 and 1.6 percent 
in 2022. 
This forecast assumes a very accommodative monetary policy and a well-communicated 
commitment by the Committee to achieve its symmetric 2 percent inflation target.  Risks to the 
growth outlook, fragility in inflation expectations, the fiscal situation, and a number of other 
factors impart a great deal of uncertainty to this forecast.  On balance, even with substantial 
monetary policy effort, we see the risks to our inflation outlook as tilted to the downside.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin, please.  
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Like everyone else, I’ve found the swiftness and 
severity of this downturn distressing.  But now, across the country, localities are in the process of 
opening up, albeit gradually.  The key questions are how quickly demand and employment will 
return and how close we’ll come to our previous path of output.  On the first, while I hear recent 
strength in automotive and residential, overall I continue to think the recovery will be a slow one.  
And both data and our contacts suggest a real dichotomy between white- and blue-collar 
workforces and their pace of returning to the economy. 
June 9–10, 2020
125 of 270


 
 
 
Workers with a college education have 7.4 percent unemployment, and 63 percent of 
them can work from home.  They’re spending less on travel and dining and saving more.  But 
their isolation has made reengaging in personal commerce seem risky.  In a recent Gallup poll, 
73 percent of college grads said they required widespread testing to return to normal activities 
versus 54 percent for noncollege grads. 
In contrast, workers with less than a high school degree have 20 percent unemployment, 
and only 23 percent can work from home.  They’ve been present in the workplace, and many 
don’t see engaging in commerce as taking as much risk as those who’ve been isolated.  Based on 
card data, their spending has actually held up, to date, in part because they received fiscal 
payments and because they tend to spend what they make.  They, of course, will face risks 
whenever fiscal support winds down. 
Higher-frequency data detail the split.  Debit card spending is stronger than that for credit 
cards, which skew higher end.  Like President Bostic, as I dig into some of the categories; travel, 
fine dining, jewelry, and elective surgeries are categories supported by the wealthier and are 
among the laggards.  In contrast, discount stores, casinos, and clothing essentials report stronger 
revenue recovery. 
In our District, affordable destinations like Myrtle Beach were packed during Memorial 
Day weekend, as were reopened stores in more rural markets.  Net, our growth forecasts are 
stronger in segments and in places with lower-income clientele and weaker for higher-end 
segments.  And given, certainly, that I and my team have been in the stay-at-home camp, we’re 
working hard to ensure we “de-bias” ourselves as we develop our perspectives. 
Labor market dynamics will be complex, and, frankly, we struggled in forecasting 
unemployment.  As economies reopen, blue-collar workers are being called back, and the May 
June 9–10, 2020
126 of 270


 
 
 
report was certainly encouraging.  But employers are being cautious and finding rehiring a 
challenge, given health risks and foregone unemployment payment.  PPP requirements have 
changed multiple times, which may help some businesses survive but could damp their near-term 
hiring incentive. 
Finally, a large number of white-collar employers report they are planning layoffs now 
that they project a slow return to less than normal.  So while we forecast a decline in 
unemployment, these dynamics will make this decline a gradual one.  We did a COVID-19 
survey of more than 1,000 employers in our District; about one-third of those firms report they 
will be running leaner operations upon returning to normal, with the modal time frame for 
“normal” in the range of 6 to 12 months.  Some simple and, of course, over-assumptive math 
would suggest that their forecast supports the Tealbook, with end-of-year GDP down around 
8 percent and unemployment around 9 percent.  And our SEP is in the same range. 
On the longer-term path, like the Tealbook and our survey, I see significant risk to future 
output.  This downturn has exposed certain industries, like physical retail, nursing homes, cruise 
lines.  Workforce participation may be impaired by health concerns and working-parent 
childcare gaps.  Immigration is likely to slow.  Productivity will likely be hurt by new health 
measures, like distancing in the workplace. 
And uncertainty matters for investment, spending, and, consequently, output.  And it’s 
just hard to imagine a more elevated uncertainty level across health outcomes, public health 
plans, level of fiscal support, global trade, global relationships, election outcomes, and 
unforeseen shocks, like the tragic events of last week.  My SEP does have one note of optimism 
in that while it contemplates continued outbreaks of infection, it assumes hospitals have built in 
capacity to be in better shape to handle them, and consumers don’t choose to exit commerce 
June 9–10, 2020
127 of 270


 
 
 
again en masse.  But, even with that assumption, it projects we don’t return to 2019 real GDP 
levels and don’t hit 4 percent unemployment until 2023. 
It does see a spike in inflation in 2022 after the recessionary drop but doesn’t choose to 
begin normalizing rates in the forecast period, thereby using that year as a chance to 
communicate on opportunistic inflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan, please. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Let me start close to home here and talk for a 
second about the energy business.  It is now our baseline judgment at the Dallas Fed that oil 
demand will recover to approximately 90 percent of 2019 levels by the third quarter of 2020 and 
may approach close to 100 percent by the fourth quarter of 2021. 
If that forecast is accurate, we would expect that the excess oil inventories that have been 
affecting this market are going to be worked off by no later than the second half of 2021.  This 
assumes that OPEC gradually phases out their production cuts, and it causes us to believe that as 
we approach that excess inventory being worked off, it’s reasonable to assume that we’ll be 
continuing to approach $45 to $50 in terms of the oil price. 
This is significant, because a number of things are going on down here.  First, as we have 
said before, a number of producers are shutting in wells.  Our contacts tell us that to reverse a 
shut-in—that is, put back online a producing well—they need a price of approximately $35.  So 
while there have been a substantial number of shut-ins so far, we think they’re now reversing. 
Second, our contacts tell us that it takes about a $40-plus price of oil to convince people 
to take a drilled but uncompleted well—that is, one that never produced—and cause it to 
produce.  Obviously, we’re above $40 now.  We think that is beginning to happen.  Third, our 
June 9–10, 2020
128 of 270


 
 
 
contacts tell us that it takes a price probably above $50 to start a new well—that is, to create a 
new rig.  Obviously, we’re not there yet. 
So, to us, all of these touchpoints help explain why we still expect shale cap-ex this year 
is going to be down almost 50 percent versus last year.  Rig count is still going to fall 65 percent, 
because to drill a new rig you need $50 and above.  And active completion crews will start to 
come back, but they’ll still be down, we think, 80 percent. 
Obviously, substantial layoffs will go with this.  A number of firms will fail.  Those that 
were leveraged service firms are not going to succeed here.  But with all of that, as we’ve said 
before, we expect crude oil output in the United States to decline from about 12.8 million barrels 
a day in December to 10.8 million barrels a day by December 2020—that is, about 2 million 
barrels a day in production cuts.   
But, actually, that’s better than you might think, in that if you included the shut-ins, the 
production cuts would be much greater.  So we think by the time you get to December of this 
year, almost everything shut in is back.  And the reason production is down in the United States 
is primarily that the decline curve in shale is so significant that there just isn’t enough new 
activity to replace the decline curve.  But it sets the stage for production to probably start 
climbing again in 2021, and that’s probably what we expect to happen. 
Now, a lot of this depends on the course of the economy and the pandemic, and I’ll go to 
our national outlook more generally.  The Friday number was a welcome surprise, but at the 
Dallas Fed we’re looking much more at the U-6 figures, which are stickier and in the low 20s 
and, for us, much more indicative of what we’re hearing from contacts.  And we’re particularly 
struck by the rise in part-time workers, which is also consistent with what we’re hearing from 
contacts, and I’ll come back to that. 
June 9–10, 2020
129 of 270


 
 
 
For much of May, we had extensive discussions with small businesses.  Two months ago, 
they were talking about how to apply for the PPP.  For the past three or four weeks, most of our 
discussions with them have been, “How do you convert a PPP loan into a grant?”  And given that 
they have limited time, it was clear that most small businesses we talked to were quite intent on 
bringing back workers.  Many of them actually did not keep workers on.  They let them go, but 
they hired them back as much as possible, in order to get the loan converted to a grant. 
And I will tell you, among banks and small businesses, they’re still not sure exactly what 
the rules are, and the banks are not sure, but small businesses wanted to make sure they qualified.  
It is clear to us that many workers who’ve been brought back are not working full time.  In fact, 
we think some who have been brought back and are not working full time, if they’re working 
less hours, are still getting unemployment benefits.  And we’re hearing that fairly broadly.  And 
if they are working full time, they’re doing a much broader range of tasks than they did before, 
and they have probably taken pay cuts in terms of tips and bonuses, depending on the industry. 
We also get the strong sense that this artificial PPP hurdle caused businesses to bring 
back these workers, but there’s no doubt that most small business owners are actively 
scrutinizing their workforce.  And as we get later in the summer and early in the fall and it 
becomes clear how good business actually is, they may well let some of these people go, but 
they’ll do it in a way, again, that doesn’t jeopardize their PPP—you know, their loan forgiveness. 
This is consistent with what we’re hearing from larger businesses.  Most are telling us 
that, number one, the very first thing they’ve done is extend maturities and make sure they have 
plenty of liquidity.  And in this regard, while almost none of them I talked to used the Fed 
program, they credit the existence of the Fed program with helping to improve market function 
so they could extend maturities, and they’ve done that broadly. 
June 9–10, 2020
130 of 270


 
 
 
All of them are thinking about costs.  Everything is on the table.  As Raphael Bostic said, 
that doesn’t just mean the right size for the business.  It also means access to office space and 
how much are they going to use.  And they’re trying to figure out what is, really, the demand for 
product and services, and the most typical view on that is, they don’t know yet.  And they’re not 
going to know until the fall, so it’s clear to us there is going to be a gut check sometime in 
August, September, maybe October when they’re going to be making very tough judgments.  
And some people who are currently employed may become unemployed at that point, depending 
on what the extent of demand is. 
They are, obviously, cautious on cap-ex across the board.  Some of them are starting to 
think about mergers and consolidations and other ways to create more cost cuts than they can do 
on their own to create synergies.  There’s no question that this situation is accelerating 
investment and technology replacing people in a broad range of businesses.  There is also no 
question in my mind that, while the first step for most businesses was to extend maturities and 
basically increase their debt, there will be a second step for many, if they can stomach it:  They 
are going to issue equity.  And if equity prices stay high, they’re going to find more ways to try 
to deleverage, I would think, and that might be a healthy thing.  And we’ll see that if—as that 
happens later in the fall. 
The last comment I would make is, from here, what we’re seeing broadly is that fiscal 
policy so far has done its job, and monetary policy has done its job.  The key that most 
businesses we talked to are looking at and the key driver of the economy, I believe, is the extent 
to which consumers reengage in a broad range of behaviors as before, as many of you have said.  
And much of this depends on the perceived risk–reward. 
June 9–10, 2020
131 of 270


 
 
 
To the extent there is widespread testing, contact tracing, and good mask and social-
distancing procedures at workplaces and at places that people go to for commercial activity, I’m 
encouraged.  I’ve been very positively surprised in this District by how willing people are to 
reengage in activities—going to restaurants, a number of people getting on planes, doing other 
things. 
On the other hand, I’ve been negatively surprised by the lack of testing, the lack of use of 
masks, and the confusing information regarding use of masks, which, based on our work, we feel 
strongly would dramatically reduce the transmission of this disease, and we believe strongly is 
not well understood.  And I think a lot of it gets to where, I think, Eric Rosengren started today. 
It basically depends on local leadership.  There isn’t national leadership on this.  And so 
what we’re finding, even in the State of Texas, is that leadership is very uneven and practices are 
very uneven.  There’s a difference between what’s being done in Dallas and what’s being done 
in Houston, and it’s not a positive thing.  And we’ve talked to the governor about it, but our 
sense is, this is going on all over the country. 
The only hopeful comment I will make is, if you’re in a low-density state, like Texas, you 
can get away with some screw-ups or basically not doing this as well.  And, we think, while 
Texas cases are rising, it will be manageable.  We worry, obviously, if you’re in a high-density 
city like New York City or in Boston or others, about the lack of a national effort.  Hopefully, 
there’s good local leadership, and I think there is. 
But if we could get this right—and Jim Bullard talked about, if we could get this right, 
this is one of the reasons for optimism—this recovery may go better than we think.  But, again, it 
depends on leadership.  And, unfortunately, in this case, it’s going to depend on local leadership 
June 9–10, 2020
132 of 270


 
 
 
throughout the United States as opposed to national leadership, because we don’t have a national 
program.  So that’s my last comment.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 10th District economy appears to have 
stabilized somewhat since our previous meeting, and I would describe the sentiment of our 
contacts as cautiously less pessimistic.  Rather than expecting a quick rebound, a new reality has 
set in that the return to normal will take longer, and that a fair number of small businesses will 
not survive.  
Job losses within our region have been broad based but more concentrated in low-wage, 
service-oriented sectors, such as leisure and hospitality, in which job losses have 
disproportionately affected younger, Hispanic, and female workers.  Despite the significant job 
losses, though, a number of contacts have noted that the Paycheck Protection Program has 
provided essential funding.  However, as businesses begin to reopen, our contacts frequently note 
that they do not anticipate returning to pre-COVID-19 staffing levels based on the productivity 
they’ve realized with fewer workers during the shutdown as well as anticipated reduced demand. 
District energy activity continues to decline.  The number of active oil and gas rigs in the 
District fell dramatically to historic lows as firms announced well shut-ins to ease production 
levels.  Most of our contacts do not expect oil and gas prices to pick up significantly in the near 
term and expect further declines in drilling and production. 
Finally, weakness in the District agricultural sector continues.  Although prices for some 
commodities have rebounded slightly, there is little prospect for improving producers’ profit 
margins.  Corn and soybean producers in the District completed planting amid favorable 
June 9–10, 2020
133 of 270


 
 
 
conditions this spring, but reduced ethanol production, slow growth in exports, and expectations 
for another large harvest have kept prices subdued. 
In the livestock industry, roughly one-fifth of U.S. meatpacking plants with confirmed 
COVID-19 cases were located in the 10th District.  Disruptions in the meat supply chain have 
slowed, but plants continue to operate at reduced capacity, which has weighed on livestock 
prices and increased retail meat prices.  Meanwhile, farmland values have remained relatively 
stable, and the prospect of government payments offers some degree of support to farm finances. 
Regarding the national outlook, incoming data since our previous meeting have 
confirmed that economic activity fell dramatically early in the second quarter.  As state and local 
health authorities begin to ease restrictions, high-frequency indicators, such as cell phone 
tracking and work schedule software, point to modest tentative signs that economic activity is 
resuming.  Still, the rebound in these indicators has been uneven across sectors, suggesting that, 
for many parts of this economy, the recovery will be tepid and perhaps incomplete. 
Like the Tealbook, I have assumed that we will avoid a second outbreak of the virus, 
although this clearly remains a meaningful risk.  In my SEP, I assume that the number of new 
cases in the United States remains close to its current plateau for some time, with voluntary 
social distancing and intermittent flare-ups limiting the extent of near-term economic recovery.  
As a result, I’ve penciled in a contraction in real GDP of about 6 percent this year, and I 
anticipate that it will take some time for this gap to close based on changes in the savings 
behavior of households and businesses and the prospects that some types of employment in 
certain sectors may not fully recover. 
My forecast assumes that consumption will be constrained by ongoing concerns about 
activities requiring close physical proximity.  In particular, food and recreation services, which 
June 9–10, 2020
134 of 270


 
 
 
accounted for a disproportionate share of the consumption decline during March and April, are 
likely to remain well below their pre-COVID-19 levels until most of the population feels safe 
from infection.  The same may hold for health-care services, which alone accounted for more 
than 30 percent of the consumption decline.  Absent this confidence, consumer spending is likely 
to be damped, with elevated levels of precautionary savings. 
In response to the University of Michigan survey question on conditions for purchasing 
household durables, the share saying it was a bad time to do so because they expect bad times 
ahead soared to its highest level in the 70-year history of the survey.  Business investment also 
faces considerable uncertainty in this environment, stemming from the course of the pandemic 
itself and its implications for the future composition and strength of demand as well as global 
trade, political uncertainty, and social unrest.   
In addition, corporate leverage remains at historically high levels, and export demand is 
likely to remain depressed for some time amid the elevated level of the foreign exchange value 
of the dollar and the prospect of persistently weak foreign demand.  Many of these headwinds 
confronting business investment will undoubtedly weigh on the labor market’s recovery.  
Although the positive labor market report for May was certainly welcome, its signal is murky. 
Ongoing questions surround the classification of respondents who were laid off as 
employed but absent from work, as well as the potential outcomes of the Paycheck Protection 
Program, which may have induced firms to rehire workers temporarily only to lay them off again 
in coming months.  While I expect a measured decline in the unemployment rate in coming 
years, my SEP shows it ending 2022 close to 6 percent, with low levels of inflation.  
Risk around my outlook for real activity and inflation remains skewed to the downside 
largely because of the unknown path of the virus and its related implications under different 
June 9–10, 2020
135 of 270


 
 
 
scenarios.  Additionally, though in my outlook I assume that the U.S. economy will escape any 
meaningful period of deflation, the stability of inflation expectations will bear watching.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman, please. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  Although current economic conditions 
remain extremely challenging, there have been several positive developments in the intervening 
weeks since our previous FOMC meeting.  Most importantly, the spread of COVID-19 appears 
to have slowed significantly, and more than half of U.S. states have begun lifting their lockdown 
restrictions. 
Our policy interventions have contributed to a substantial calming in financial markets.  
Credit flows to businesses and households have picked up.  Borrowing conditions and rates have 
eased in some sectors, and there are few signs of serious strains at the moment outside of small 
business and agriculture.  I’m pleased that the Main Street Lending Program will soon become 
operational.  And as we go forward, I’ll be interested to see how the program is used by lenders 
and borrowers and the extent to which the credit needs of small and midsized businesses are met. 
In addition to the improved credit flows, the May employment report was substantially 
better than most had anticipated and indicates that many individuals who had lost their jobs in 
March or April either returned to their jobs or found new employment in May.  Even though the 
overall unemployment rate is still quite high, the broad-based improvements in payroll numbers 
in May are very encouraging.  And as many have noted, several indicators of consumer spending 
have turned up in recent weeks and suggest that the large spending declines may be behind us. 
For example, motor vehicle sales moved up in May, credit card payments data showed a 
notable increase, and cell phone data reveal that many are venturing away from their homes.  It’s 
June 9–10, 2020
136 of 270


 
 
 
possible that this increase in consumer outlays could mostly reflect households quickly spending 
their stimulus checks, in which case the recent improvements may be short lived.  But I do 
believe that we are seeing some early signs of a lasting recovery in economic activity.  The 
economy is reopening, and some of the most dire outcomes that sounded plausible only two 
months ago now seem much less likely. 
In the agriculture sector, government payment programs included in the CARES Act will 
help ease short-term financial pressures, though long-term prospects for the sector remain 
stressed because of extremely low commodity prices, processing disruptions, and a significant 
decline in ethanol demand, as President George just noted. 
Over the next few months, as restrictions on activity continue to ease, enhanced 
unemployment insurance benefits and stimulus payments will provide important and necessary 
financial support to many families.  But I am concerned that the financial well-being of many 
families, especially those at the lower end of the income distribution, will be severely affected 
during this prolonged period of inactivity. 
We know that early job losses have been heavily concentrated among the most 
financially vulnerable, including lower-wage workers, young people, women, and blacks and 
Hispanics.  Unless the affected industries recover quickly and rehire these workers, even with the 
substantial support from fiscal policy, we will likely see more families unable to keep current on 
their mortgages, rents, car payments, credit cards, and other expenses. 
Requests for mortgage forbearance, while not as high as many had feared, have continued 
to edge up in recent weeks.  But this is tempered by the large number of these borrowers who 
remain current despite requesting forbearance.  We also have seen increased indications that 
many families may be struggling to keep up with their rent payments. 
June 9–10, 2020
137 of 270


 
 
 
I also remain concerned that without an immediate resumption in operations, small 
businesses will not have sufficient working capital to weather an even more prolonged period of 
lost revenues, especially those engaged in the seasonal tourist trade and related activity, or large 
events like sporting events and entertainment. 
One business contact estimates that 30 percent of independent restaurants will close 
permanently.  In her view, prior to the pandemic, there was excess capacity, and there may be a 
limited survival runway for these smaller chains and local restaurants.  The same, she says, is 
true in retail and hotels, with hotels of the greatest risk likely on the budget end of the segment. 
Despite the critical injections of capital from the PPP, the balance sheets of many small 
businesses remain impaired.  The Census Bureau’s latest pulse survey showed one-third of 
responding firms have less than one month of cash on hand, which is down from the roughly 
50 percent share reported a few weeks earlier, but this is still a large figure. 
I’ve also heard concerns, as President Kaplan noted earlier, from many lenders and 
borrowers about the requirements for PPP loan forgiveness.  Loan volumes have dropped 
noticeably in the latest tranche of the PPP, and some speculate that the payroll retention 
requirements deter some firms from borrowing.  Other business owners report that pay from 
employment does not compare with the enhanced unemployment benefits.  If businesses can’t 
survive to reopen, PPP funds will be of little help.  But the recent legislative changes should help 
address many of these issues, and time will tell. 
The potential for business failures and resulting defaults is also concerning.  Additionally, 
the latest moves in equity prices seem out of step with realistic revenue expectations, which 
could have negative effects somewhere down the line.  I still perceive a risk that financial 
pressures could reemerge and reignite the sense of panic that prevailed in March, but we now 
June 9–10, 2020
138 of 270


 
 
 
appear to be moving in a positive direction, awaiting progress in the timelines for easing stay-at-
home orders and fully reopening the economy. 
The staff have done great work to present several plausible paths forward.  In my mind, 
the one that is most likely is broadly consistent with the “Early Moderation” scenario.  If a 
second wave does occur, its effect could be focused in some limited geographic areas.  And by 
that point, I expect we will have learned from our previous experience and found better ways to 
mitigate the spread of the virus than limiting the movements of the entire population.  But the 
uncertainties surrounding this outlook are high.  We could see additional flare-ups of the virus in 
some cities, and the potential for another round of broad school and business closures is not 
unrealistic, but we hope could be more targeted. 
These are challenging times, and it’s important that we’re sensitive to the fact that lives 
and businesses are being severely affected.  Not only are people concerned about their financial 
situations, but also about the recent and important broader social and law enforcement issues that 
have prompted demonstrations in many cities across the country.  And, as many have noted 
before me, I’m also pleased that the Federal Reserve has shown leadership and supports diversity 
and inclusion within the System and the financial system as a whole. 
As we continue to monitor developments carefully, we must be prepared to respond 
promptly and meaningfully to events as they unfold.  This includes, of course, adjusting the 
stance of our monetary policy, if needed, in the coming months.  In addition, we should remain 
observant to the changing conditions that financial institutions of all sizes are facing and be open 
to adjusting supervision as needed and as appropriate.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard, please. 
June 9–10, 2020
139 of 270


 
 
 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Following a dramatic decline in March and 
April, activity appears to have bottomed out and started to recover in May because of earlier-
than-expected rollbacks of COVID-19 restrictions, and financial markets are buoyant.  
Nonetheless, the recovery remains hostage to the course of the pandemic, uncertainty is high, 
and the balance of risks is to the downside. 
Data received since we last met have confirmed that activity plunged in March and April.  
Retail sales, motor vehicle sales, and manufacturing output all saw declines of historic 
magnitude.  Aggregate projections have real GDP falling at a staggering annual rate, between 35 
and 40 percent in the current quarter, following a 5 percent drop last quarter. 
But the most recent indicators suggest activity has bottomed out and is starting to bounce 
back.  Many states are rolling back mandatory social distancing earlier than we expected at our 
April meeting.  The inflection was initially apparent in a few high-frequency indicators of 
mobility, restaurant dining, weekly motor vehicle sales, and non-food retail goods spending. 
These early signs were given dramatic corroboration by the upside surprise of 
unprecedented magnitude in last Friday’s employment report.  The payroll employment increase 
of 2.5 million confounded market expectations for a decline of several million.  Unemployment 
defied expectations with a 1.4 percentage point decline, despite a 0.6 percentage point increase in 
the participate rate.  These developments are welcome, but they should not distract from a 
13.3 percent unemployment rate, near its postwar highs, and a net decline in payroll employment 
of 19.5 million. 
On the other side of our dual mandate, inflation has receded farther below target, 
reflecting weaker demand along with lower oil prices.  Both core and total PCE prices fell in 
June 9–10, 2020
140 of 270


 
 
 
March and April, leaving the 12-month changes at 1.0 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively.  
Like Governor Clarida, I worry about a decline in inflation expectations. 
By contrast, financial market sentiment is buoyant, with optimism about reopening and 
potential virus treatments more than offsetting concerns about weak data releases earlier in the 
period and renewed tensions between the United States and China more recently. 
My discussions with market participants were notably upbeat, with most crediting the 
early and forceful response by the Federal Reserve and the Congress for the rapid restoration of 
market functioning and the improvement in risk appetite.  The expansion and destigmatization of 
the swap lines are credited with the rapid normalization of dollar funding conditions abroad.  Fed 
facilities are credited for the substantial improvements in the municipal bond market, in which 
spreads have come down and issuances resumed in the higher-rated segment of the market. 
The Federal Reserve backstop is credited with supporting the record level of issuance in 
corporate bond markets, with corporations taking advantage of the improved conditions to pay 
down revolvers and shore up liquidity buffers to bridge an air pocket of between 18 and 
24 months.  The improvement has worked its way from investment grade into fallen angels and 
to high-yield more broadly, albeit to a lesser degree.  Leveraged loan issuance is expected to 
improve more slowly and cautiously.  There are some concerns that many CLO managers are 
already exceeding their limits on triple-C-rated debt, limiting their ability to absorb more in the 
event of downgrades. 
While we have seen substantial downgrades so far and market participants anticipate 
further downgrades, particularly in the large triple-B segment, they nonetheless don’t anticipate 
much more selling due to the changes in the investor base.  Though defaults have thus far been 
June 9–10, 2020
141 of 270


 
 
 
contained, it’s too early to draw any firm conclusions, as forbearance may be masking some 
stresses. 
With the S&P 500 index now well above 3,000 and the VIX below 25, market 
participants expressed some puzzlement over the buoyant tone in equity markets, especially 
given the elevated uncertainty surrounding earnings over the next few quarters and U.S.–China 
tensions.  As Lorie Logan noted, the puzzle remains even after taking into account the decline in 
risk-free rates. 
The Treasury yield curve has steepened noticeably, reflecting in part expected increases 
in issuance of longer-term securities as well as improved sentiment.  A number of market 
participants raised questions about possible shifts in the demand for long-dated Treasury 
securities, the durability of their value as a hedging instrument, and whether they will play a 
diminished role in multi-asset portfolios. 
In contrast to the highly leveraged corporate sector going into the crisis, which is likely to 
be an amplifier, the relatively low levels of leverage on household balance sheets, in comparison 
to during the Global Financial Crisis, could augur well for housing to play a bigger role in the 
current recovery, although consumer resilience will hinge centrally on the outlook for 
employment. 
Even though the positive news and the most recent indicators and the notable 
improvements in financial markets over recent weeks provide reasons to hope for a checkmark-
shaped recovery, the forward path of the virus and the economy remain extraordinarily uncertain. 
Let me conclude by briefly reviewing the possible risks.  On the upside, it’s possible that 
the virus spread will remain contained despite the easing of social distancing under way.  In that 
case, the rebound in activity could be relatively rapid, given that the economy entered the crisis 
June 9–10, 2020
142 of 270


 
 
 
on a strong footing, and the monetary and especially fiscal policy response has been timely and 
sizable.  It also remains possible that testing and tracing, along with effective therapeutics or a 
vaccine, could be made widely available earlier than generally expected. 
However, downside risks loom larger.  Like many of you, I worry that current approaches 
to reopening may cause the virus spread to rise, given that the capacity for testing and contact 
tracing remain well below what public health experts prescribe.  Rolling flare-ups or a second 
wave in the autumn may lead to the reimposition of strict social distancing or a sharp increase in 
voluntary social distancing, weighing on the recovery and possibly resulting in a further 
contraction—the dreaded “W.”  A second wave could reignite financial market volatility and 
market disruptions at a time of greater vulnerability.  Moreover, persistent behavioral changes 
due to lingering concerns about infections could depress demand for a prolonged period and 
could change some sectors permanently, such as retail, higher education, or cruise lines.  As 
Stacey Tevlin noted earlier, there could be persistent damage to the productive capacity of the 
economy from a protracted downturn, with a wave of insolvencies, depressed investment, 
destruction of intangible business capital, and long-term severing of labor force attachment.   
Moreover, any of the U.S. scenarios could be exacerbated by foreign spillovers.  As Beth 
Anne Wilson noted, the staff estimates that foreign real GDP will drop nearly 30 percent at 
annual rate in the second quarter after falling at an annual rate of more than 11 percent in 
the first.  While the potential for a pan-euro-area fiscal response provides some reason for 
optimism, China’s recent provocations in Hong Kong and the renewed escalation of tensions 
between the United States and China pose new risks to the outlook, and the outlook for many 
emerging markets remains fragile. 
June 9–10, 2020
143 of 270


 
 
 
All told, my modal outlook is for activity to decline notably this year and recover only 
gradually over the following two years, with core inflation still below our 2 percent objective and 
employment short of its maximum through the end of 2022.  As Mark Carlson noted, this is 
similar to the majority of SEP respondents.  My modal outlook is premised on significant 
ongoing monetary and fiscal support, and I put significant weight on a more adverse scenario.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles, please.  
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The course of the economy over the next 
12 months will depend on the decisions that federal, state, and local officials make in response to 
their assessments of the complex of occurrences that we might call the COVID-19 event.  These 
decisions have evolved rapidly.  They’ll continue to evolve, and so I want to thank the Board 
staff and those throughout the System who’ve been ramping up their use of real-time data to 
track the unfolding economic toll. 
My modal outlook, as the economists have taught me to say, is broadly in line with the 
Tealbook baseline.  I think the welcome employment report last Friday indicated that the PPP is 
succeeding in helping many workers remain connected to their current employers.  That’s 
excellent news, but it didn’t fundamentally alter my forecast.  I’d already been expecting a 
somewhat less dire near-term outcome, reflecting faster-than-expected and more successful 
easing of social distancing—which is easy to expect out here in the Rocky Mountains—and 
increased dissemination of stimulus payments.  For the trends in employment that the staff sees 
in ADP data, some spending indicators suggest further economic triage into June. 
But my forecast for the second half of this year is a little less rosy than the Tealbook 
because of the lingering effects on businesses of governmental communications and response 
June 9–10, 2020
144 of 270


 
 
 
measures made over the course of the past three months.  As noted throughout the Beige Book, 
employers are having trouble restaffing due to potential workers remaining concerned about the 
threat from the virus and the option provided by more generous unemployment benefits. 
In addition, it remains to be seen how successful our efforts to preserve the viability of 
shuttered businesses have been, as many of you have noted.  The staff are following survey data 
in which the share of businesses indicating that their operations will never return to normal 
jumped in the last two weeks of May to near 10 percent, and 33 percent of the sampled small 
businesses had less than a month of cash on hand as of mid-May.  So I worry that, if staged and 
partial reopening plans aren’t sufficient to stem losses, we could see an acceleration of business 
closures that would hinder the recovery. 
Fundamental changes spurred by the COVID-19 event, again, as many of you have noted, 
could lead to semipermanent downshifts in employment, spending, and investment.  We’ve 
heard anecdotes of accelerated automation, that telecommunication will alter spending in office 
demand, and that business travel could remain depressed. 
Let me also say a few words about the way I’m thinking about the “Second Waves” 
scenario in the Tealbook.  Here I’m more optimistic than the staff, echoing some of the 
comments that Governor Bowman made.  We’ve expanded testing, improved treatment, and 
instituted less drastic but still useful mitigation strategies over the course of the past few months, 
so I’m hopeful that we can both continue to normalize activity and avoid results that would lead 
governments to reimpose stay-at-home policies, at least not nearly to the same extent that we’ve 
experienced in the spring. 
I haven’t changed my view on the long-run values of real GDP, inflation, unemployment, 
and the federal funds rate.  I’m quite confident that we can move past this event and our response 
June 9–10, 2020
145 of 270


 
 
 
to it without having damaged the underlying potential of the economy or fundamentally altered 
relationships among output, employment, and prices. 
The massive decline in labor force participation is, however, particularly worrisome, 
especially given the long and slow recovery in that particular measure after the financial crisis.  
The federal government’s unprecedented fiscal response to the COVID-19 event will require 
consolidation at some point. 
State and local government finances, even in well-managed places like Utah, are strained.  
The choices made to normalize those budget paths will affect economic incentives in the medium 
and long term. 
The continued flow of credit will be critical to the recovery.  Now it looks as though 
credit is flowing at acceptable terms to large corporations, in part because of our efforts to 
stabilize bond markets, as well as to households.  We’ve so far taken solace in the willingness of 
banks to provide massive amounts of credit to their business customers under their existing credit 
lines.   
But we also need to ensure that the supply of new loans to creditworthy borrowers 
remains adequate.  Regulatory data for large banks show that, in the first quarter, the total 
amount of available credit to businesses, the sum of outstanding loans and unused credit lines, 
contracted slightly.  And that’s consistent with the tightening seen in the previous Senior Loan 
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices. 
In the second half of May, outstanding loans to financial and nonfinancial businesses 
began contracting at the largest banks.  Much of that probably reflected takeouts of prior 
drawdowns on backup credit lines by firms that have now issued bonds.  But business loans have 
leveled off at smaller banks as well, which more likely reflects a pullback in new lending.  For 
June 9–10, 2020
146 of 270


 
 
 
instance, our supervisory contacts indicate that demand for the Main Street credit facilities may 
be limited, in part because of our stated expectations that banks will follow normal underwriting 
processes, which they believe would lead to a pullback in credit.  And in the Beige Book, there 
were many comments indicating that banks have stopped making business loans except for those 
guaranteed through the PPP.  On the positive side, staff discussions with banks during Main 
Street outreach suggest that they remain willing to accommodate borrowers who have sound 
collateral, although at moderately more stringent terms than before. 
Finally, later this month we’ll release our stress test results, including a discussion of the 
robustness exercise and sensitivity analyses that we’ve undertaken to ensure that those results are 
viewed as credible and to inform any supervisory or regulatory actions we may consider.  We 
should remain committed to ensuring that our banks will continue to be a source of strength in 
navigating this downturn.  And, transparency being my watchword, I am SEP participant number 
three.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’ll start with the local economy—further 
declines in all sectors of the Ninth District since our previous meeting, with widespread job 
losses, especially in the tourism and health-care sectors.  The majority of construction firms are 
reporting projects canceled; construction was deemed an essential industry during our shutdown, 
but they’re seeing their forward-looking projects canceled. 
Sharp falls, obviously, in retail, eating, drinking, and lodging, with some modest pickup 
in the past month as lockdowns have eased.  Protests related to police violence and related 
damage have kept many Twin Cities businesses closed for the past week.  And there’s emerging 
evidence of downward pressure on wages in construction and education.  Flat and falling input 
June 9–10, 2020
147 of 270


 
 
 
prices in manufacturing, and housing construction has slowed, but home sales still appear quite 
robust. 
So let’s look forward.  As everybody has noted, the virus is dictating the economy.  So 
my baseline, what I put in the SEP, is for a second wave.  And I was kind of surprised that it 
didn’t seem in anybody else’s SEP submission that their baseline was a second wave.  I was 
surprised by that, because the Tealbook says it’s equally plausible that you could have the 
baseline in the Tealbook or a second wave.  So I was surprised that I was the only one who 
appeared to opt for the second wave. 
Let me just tell you why I think a second wave is most likely, unfortunately.  First of all, 
we’re nowhere near herd immunity.  The experts say between 5 and 10 percent of the U.S. 
population—maybe on the low end of that—has been infected and since recovered, and they 
think we need 60 to 70 percent.  So this virus has a long way to go. 
The virus is still highly contagious.  You know, we had this conference, which you know 
about, bringing health experts together with economists.  I thought Larry Summers had a good 
way of looking at it.  He said that estimates are that R0—so, the average number of uninfected 
people that one infected person passes the virus on to—was around 2.5 in the unmitigated spread 
of the virus in February.  At the maximum lockdown in the United States, it was down around 
0.8 or 0.9.  Our lockdown in America was much less onerous than in many other countries.  We 
are not that locked down, relatively speaking.  And now we’ve been moving back.  So what’s R0 
today?  Probably somewhere in between, certainly north of 1.0; could be 1.2, 1.5, 1.75—hard to 
know.  But there’s no question the virus is still spreading. 
And you’re seeing mixed evidence around the country.  In Texas, the virus is spreading, 
in California the virus is spreading, and in Arizona, the cases are going up.  Here in Minnesota, 
June 9–10, 2020
148 of 270


 
 
 
the cases were going up, hospitalizations were going up, and ICU admissions were all going up 
when we declared our lockdown over.  It was a curious time to declare the lockdown over. 
And so, there may be some seasonality.  It’s getting warmer, finally, in Minnesota, and 
now, somehow, after we’ve relaxed our lockdown, things seem to be tapering off.  But I worry 
that, if there is seasonality to it, we may be getting a false sense of comfort from that seasonality 
if things seem to go dormant over the summer, and then we’re going to think that everything 
is fine.  So, like Eric, the positive unemployment surprise on Friday is good news that some 
people are finding work again.  But it may indicate that we’re just relaxing the shutdown much 
quicker than we had expected, and it may well be setting us up for a reemergence of the virus. 
Add to that, you know, the protests that we’ve discussed here, which are meaningful and 
important in driving social change.  You’re seeing thousands of people in close proximity with 
each other, which also could be contributing to future viral spread.  So this could be setting us up 
for a second wave in the fall.  In fact, again, I think that’s my base-case scenario. 
What would prevent a second wave in the fall?  These are upside risks that would have to 
take place.  Jim and Rob talked about widespread testing.  We’ve talked about therapies or 
vaccines.  You know, in early April, Harvard came out with a study and said we need 5 million 
tests a day by early June to open safely.  It’s now early June, and we’ve got 500,000 tests per 
day.  We’re at 10 percent of the mark.  And they said we should be at 20 million per day by late 
July.  We’re nowhere close. 
Could there be a breakthrough?  Sure, but that would be an upside surprise, not a 
baseline—same thing with therapies and vaccines.  Or maybe the virus will just find a way to 
burn itself out.  That would just be wonderful if that were to happen.  But, again, I can’t make 
that my base-case scenario.  My base-case scenario is 5 to 7 percent of Americans have been 
June 9–10, 2020
149 of 270


 
 
 
exposed to this, and we’re somehow on our way to 60 or 70 percent.  I hope it’s through a 
vaccine and not through actually achieving herd immunity.  That’s why the second wave is my 
base case. 
Let me just turn to inflation.  I’ll be brief.  Like others have said, inflation has fallen far 
below our target.  Core PCE on a 12-month basis is only around 1 percent.  April saw the largest 
one-month decline on record.  A lot of factors are pulling down prices—weak demand, but also 
low oil prices and the relatively strong dollar.  High unemployment is likely to depress wage 
growth.   
Inflation expectations as measured by financial markets have slipped since the COVID-
19 crisis began.  The five-year, five-year measure from TIPS is only around 1.56 percent.  I 
anticipate inflation running significantly below target for an extended period, and I see 
significant risks that inflation expectations will continue to drift downward.  So I’d be supportive 
of whatever action we can take to bolster inflation expectations. 
The last thing I’ll just say is, I agree with Mary on her comments about labor market 
slack and the natural rate of unemployment.  This is why I asked a question of Stacey when they 
brought their natural rate up.  I’ll just confess, I was frustrated that it seemed like the Board staff 
is very reluctant to bring down the natural rate year after year after year of low inflation, low 
wage growth.  We had 3.5 percent unemployment, and the Board staff still thought that the 
natural rate was well above that.  But they’re very quick to ratchet it back up.  And so I’m 
worried that once we get through this COVID-19 crisis, we’re going to be on another multiyear 
journey of gradually ratcheting it back down.  So thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
June 9–10, 2020
150 of 270


 
 
 
MS. MESTER. Thank you, Mr. Chair.  And I want to thank you for including comments 
in your press conference on the Federal Reserve’s fundamental values to treat everyone with 
dignity and respect, to create a culture of diversity, inclusion, and opportunity, and to foster 
efforts to reduce long-standing inequality in the country.  Unfortunately, the reconnaissance that 
we’ve been doing in the Fourth District just shows very clearly that the pandemic is going to 
increase that inequality. 
Our overall economic conditions in the Fourth District economy remain weak.  In a 
survey of regional contacts taken the last week of May and after the Beige Book survey, fewer 
than 20 percent of respondents reported that output had either already returned to pre-pandemic 
levels or that they expected to do so over the next three months, and about 40 percent said they 
expected it would take at least a year to recover to that level.  Those in professional and business 
services and transportation are the most optimistic, while manufacturers and those in 
construction and real estate are the most pessimistic.  And one commercial real estate contact 
expressed concern about the viability of mall-like shopping centers that were already struggling 
to find tenants before the pandemic, given the trend to more online shopping.  The strategy had 
been to devote more space to entertainment-oriented businesses, such as arcades and indoor 
mini-golf parks, but the pandemic now threatens the viability of these businesses and the success 
of that strategy. 
Labor market conditions in the District remain weak.  We don’t have the regional 
employment data for May yet, so we don’t know if they will show the same kind of improvement 
as in the national data.  But our survey evidence indicates that firms have been slower to recall 
laid-off workers than they had originally intended to.  One-half of the firms in our survey have 
laid off or furloughed workers.  About one-third of the firms who laid off workers plan to rehire 
June 9–10, 2020
151 of 270


 
 
 
between 90 to 100 percent of those workers over the next three months, but only a slightly 
smaller proportion plan to call back fewer than 25 percent of those laid off. 
More than one-fourth of District contacts have reported reducing product prices, although 
supply chain disruptions, particularly for beef, poultry, and pork, have led to some selected price 
increases.  While some contacts noted that increased costs to comply with safety and social-
distancing guidelines—including installing barriers, more frequent cleaning, and reconfiguring 
office and plant layouts—most did not see those costs as significant at this point. 
Now, despite the continued weakness, there are some positive notes from the District.  As 
shutdown orders in Fourth District states eased over the course of May, some activities picked up 
faster than contacts had expected, particularly in harder-hit businesses that rely more on 
customer traffic.  Auto dealers saw sales increase in May after a sharp decline in April, although 
they don’t expect sales to return quickly to pre-pandemic levels because of diminished demand 
from rental car companies.  A national apparel retailer, which opened 15 percent of its stores 
toward the end of May, reported that in-store sales had outpaced projections and that returning 
customers appeared happy to be back.  An owner of restaurants in Pennsylvania and New York 
reported that continued takeout activity and limited dine-in service had brought revenues up to 
about 75 percent of normal, and he said that that level was the level needed for those restaurants 
to remain viable businesses. 
Turning to the national economy, I anticipate that the second quarter will show the most 
severe effects on the economy from the virus and the shutdown to help limit its spread.  Second-
quarter growth will be deeply negative.  But, as seen in the District, there are some green shoots 
seen in the very high frequency indicators on spending, and estimates produced by the Board 
staff from confidential weekly data from ADP show that the number of employees actually being 
June 9–10, 2020
152 of 270


 
 
 
paid rose by more than 5 million from late April to late May.  The employment report for May 
was a positive surprise, showing an increase in jobs in sectors that have begun to reopen and a 
decrease in the unemployment rate. 
Now, as more and more regions and sectors of the economy reopen, rates of growth are 
going to look very good.  I am reminding myself not to get blinded to the fact that we’re digging 
out from a very deep hole and to think in terms of levels, at least over the next few months, as 
more of the economy reopens.  For example, despite the unexpected decline in the 
unemployment rate in May, 21 million workers are unemployed compared with 6 million in 
February.  That’s about 1 in 12 Americans.  In October 2009, the worst point in the last cycle, 
about 1 in 15 people were unemployed.  The gain of 2.5 million payroll jobs in May is only a 
little more than one-tenth of those lost in March and April, and the number of payroll jobs is still 
13 percent below February’s level. 
Macroeconomic forecasting is particularly challenging at this time.  The outlook depends 
not only on the course of the pandemic, but also on how households and businesses respond to it 
and on the efficacy of policy actions taken to mitigate the effects and support the economy.  And 
there are several plausible paths the virus could take and several plausible paths that the 
economy might take to respond to a particular path of the virus, depending on the actions of 
consumers, firms, and policymakers.  So the level of uncertainty surrounding the forecast is 
very high. 
Now, recent results from the daily online national survey of households that the 
Cleveland Fed has been running since early March suggest widely varying attitudes about both 
the pandemic and behavior.  Half of the respondents think the pandemic will last a year or less, 
and, on average, this group says they are likely to eventually return to their pre-pandemic uses of 
June 9–10, 2020
153 of 270


 
 
 
bars and restaurants, public spaces, public transportation, and crowded events.  The other half of 
the respondents expect the pandemic to last more than a year, and, on average, this group says 
that they will engage in these activities to a lesser extent than they once did even after the 
pandemic has ended.  We are trying to investigate whether it’s just general optimistic and general 
pessimistic groups that have these attitudes or whether there is something more specific to the 
view about the pandemic that explains those results. 
My SEP forecast is conditioned on the following pandemic scenario.  I am assuming that 
stay-at-home orders will continue to be gradually lifted over the summer, but some restrictions, 
including on the size of public gatherings, will remain in effect through the end of the year as 
testing and tracking capabilities successfully expand.  Restrictions become more risk focused, 
some treatments will become available in 2021, and a vaccine becomes widely available in 
2021:Q3.  Epidemiologists tell us to expect periodic upswings in the number of cases until the 
vaccine is distributed.  The issue is whether the health-care system can handle the upswing.  In 
this scenario, I assume it can, and this means that the public remains comfortable engaging in 
activities despite the periodic increases. 
Under this scenario, I anticipate that the trough will be in the second quarter, and that the 
economy will begin to recover in the second half of the year as states continue to relax 
restrictions and people begin to feel more comfortable reengaging in economic activity.  Even so, 
some industries, including travel and leisure and hospitality, will be slower to recover than 
others, because even if people are permitted to resume some of their normal activities, they need 
to feel some reassurance that it’s safe to do so. 
With the shutdown phase ending, the economy enters the second phase, in which the 
recovery continues over the forecast horizon, with unemployment rates falling and inflation 
June 9–10, 2020
154 of 270


 
 
 
gradually rising with support from policy actions that help the economy avoid more persistent 
damage.  Factors such as changes in consumer behavior, including shopping and dining 
preferences, household living preferences, firms’ demand for office space, and the 
reestablishment of more robust supply chains, could all necessitate structural changes to the 
economy, which may take some time to work through. 
Many firms will not be able to recover, especially those that were operating on narrow 
margins and with high leverage before the pandemic and where social distancing continues to 
limit capacity.  While a significant number of workers who lost jobs during the shutdown period 
will be rehired, others are going to need to retool for jobs in different sectors.  If 60 percent of 
the 22 million jobs lost are temporary, that means about 9 million are going to be more 
persistent. 
So, in my view, the recovery will take some time and will need to be supported by 
accommodative monetary policy over the forecast horizon.  In my projection, by the end of the 
forecast horizon, inflation is still running below 2 percent.  And though there has been a 
significant decline in the unemployment rate, the economy has still not returned to maximum 
sustainable employment.  Thus, I do not anticipate an increase in the funds rate will be 
appropriate over the forecast horizon. 
 Whether stronger forward guidance than what we have communicated so far will be 
required, and whether balance sheet policy will be required, will depend on the path of the 
recovery.  Currently, market participants and the public already expect that the funds rate will 
remain low for some time, so there is no urgency to change our forward guidance.  However, in 
my forecast I have assumed that the FOMC will clarify its forward guidance later this year in 
support of the recovery and the achievement of our dual-mandate goals. 
June 9–10, 2020
155 of 270


 
 
 
I have also assumed that the Committee will transition from its program of asset 
purchases intended to smooth market functioning to purchasing longer-term assets to support the 
recovery.  And I also assume there will be additional fiscal policy support in the form of support 
to state and local governments and further direct payments to households most affected by the 
pandemic shutdown.  This aid is needed because much of the economic sacrifice that has been 
made in the interest of public health has been borne by the most vulnerable in our economy—
lower-income and minority workers and communities and the smaller of the small businesses. 
Now, even within the pandemic scenario that I have assumed, there are both downside 
and upside risks to my forecast.  On the downside, the surprising May employment report may 
make further fiscal policy actions less likely even if they are needed.  On the upside, the May 
employment report may mean that the underlying fundamentals are stronger and the recovery 
will be stronger than I projected. 
But, overall, I see the risks tilted to the downside, in particular because there is a potential 
for a different pandemic scenario than what I have assumed.  In this more severe virus scenario, 
cases rise fast enough this fall to put significant stress on the health-care system in some parts of 
the country.  In this scenario, I think governors will find it actually hard to gain public support to 
reinstate the restrictions seen in the first shutdown, but people would likely voluntarily restrict 
some of their activity.  This would result in sharp falls in spending with more permanent job 
losses, business failures, and credit defaults, and the virus may actually end up being worse 
because states are reluctant to reinstate the restrictions. 
Now, there’s also a possibility of an upside scenario.  If there is faster progress on 
COVID-19 testing, contact tracing, and capacity in the health-care system, and if activity 
restrictions become more risk focused, the expected increase in cases in the fall would be less 
June 9–10, 2020
156 of 270


 
 
 
disruptive to economic activity, resulting in a stronger recovery.  I put the greatest likelihood on 
the virus scenario on which I condition my forecast, with the more severe virus scenario 
somewhat less likely and the benign virus scenario the least likely of the three.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams, please. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Incoming data have ranged from 
deeply discouraging to somewhat encouraging to outright inexplicable.  And, in the final 
category, I would include the May employment report that was, of course, an enormous upside 
surprise. 
In assessing recent data from high-frequency indicators of mobility to the traditional 
economic releases, I’m applying a relatively low signal-to-noise ratio to each individual data 
point.  This reflects a lack of historical experience with many of these new high-frequency 
indicators, problems with mismeasurement when many businesses are shuttered and individuals 
are sheltering in place, as well as the unique nature of the pandemic and the public health 
response that limit the usefulness of many of our standard models and analytical tools.   
I will pause to say, however, that one model we’ve had and used, which hasn’t been 
mentioned today—I was surprised by this, so I’m going to mention it—has proven to be an 
incredibly good forecaster, and that is the inverted yield curve.  So we inverted the yield curve 
last summer.  We all said, “That didn’t tell us anything.”  It was, “Well, we don’t believe it, 
don’t listen.”  The Board wrote memos:  The yield curve is wrong.  We got a recession in 
February.  The yield curve has been an almost perfect predictor of recessions since World War 
II.  And we can quibble about whether the yield curve knew that we were going to have a 
recession for these reasons, but, again, another out-of-sample data point.  Okay, I know Stacey 
June 9–10, 2020
157 of 270


 
 
 
will punish me for saying that by sending a very extensive memo about why that claim was 
wrong. 
Despite these caveats about reading the recent data, I think the signals we’re getting do 
confirm that where state and local governments have eased restrictions and allowed their 
economies to partially reopen, the level of economic activity has bottomed out and is showing 
signs of starting to recover.  Interestingly, we’re seeing this not only in the U.S. data, but also in 
our neighbor to the north.  According to the Labour Force Survey for Canada, which I am 
holding right here and, I admit, I read for the first time in my life, employment in Canada in May 
rebounded there after some provinces had begun to ease their restrictions and reversed about 
10 percent of the employment losses and absences that were recorded in the previous two 
months.  In fact, the parallels between what we saw in Canada over the past three months and in 
the United States are really quite eerie.  The patterns of rebound by sector and region mimic 
those that were seen in the U.S. data.  And I do think that there’s some signal here and some 
credence to the view that the employment report that we saw for the United States was not just a 
fluke, since we’re seeing very much the same pattern in another country right north of us. 
Now, in the Second District, restrictions are being lifted later and more gradually than in 
many other parts of the country.  So we’re now seeing initial signs of stabilization in 
employment and activity, led by the manufacturing sector.  In fact, I was serenaded by the 
beautiful music of construction crews and honking horns as I walked into the office this morning, 
something I had not experienced in three months, because they just started stage one of 
reopening New York City on Monday. 
Despite signs of improvement, however, the level of activity remains very depressed.  For 
example, based on data from Womply, revenues at New York small businesses are still 
June 9–10, 2020
158 of 270


 
 
 
40 percent below January levels.  That’s twice the falloff that we see for the country as a whole 
in this measure.   
Still, like the Tealbook, I expect a full return of contact-intensive activities, like dining 
out, travel, and attending public events, will take quite some time, extending well into next year.  
And that reflects the gradual relaxation of restrictions on occupancy and, importantly, the 
gradual adjustment to voluntary social-distancing behavior as well. 
As a result, like many of you have said, the overall recovery of the economy will likely 
be long and painfully slow.  Now, the sectors that will experience delayed returns of activity 
compose a larger share of employment compared with value-added, and, therefore, I expect the 
unemployment rate to actually come down relatively gradually—say, compared with an Okun’s 
law calculation—despite what I expect to see as a pretty robust rebound in GDP growth starting 
in the second half of this year and extending to next year.  Specifically, I see the unemployment 
rate ending this year at about 10 percent, declining to about 6.5 percent by the end of next year, 
and only falling below 5 percent in late 2022.  You can learn more about my outlook in the SEP 
submission, for which I’m participant number two. 
Now, my forecast of a solid but gradual recovery hinges on a number of assumptions, and 
I lack much conviction that things will play out this way.  It’s predicated on staying in a 
relatively narrow path, with much worse outcomes on either side.  On the one hand, if, out of 
fear of contracting the virus, people remain very cautious and avoid travel, dining out, and going 
to concerts and sporting events, this hesitancy will hold the recovery back.  On the other hand, if 
people rush back without a care in the world, there is a greater risk of a substantial second wave 
to the pandemic, as many have mentioned.  And these would, of course, have dire consequences, 
June 9–10, 2020
159 of 270


 
 
 
both in terms of the economy and human suffering.  These are risks we do not control, obviously, 
but we must recognize them as we contemplate what the future might hold. 
In addition to the uncertainties about the path of the virus, there are a number of other 
sources of uncertainty.  And, looking forward, I see the risks predominantly to the downside.  
The first is fiscal policy.  Government support to individuals and businesses has been critical in 
helping keep families and small businesses going.  In my forecast, I assume there’s a further 
round of fiscal actions to provide support for households, businesses, and state and local 
governments through the second half of the year.  In the event that does not happen, there’s 
much greater risk of layoffs, commercial rents not being paid and resulting stress in commercial 
real estate markets, and a wave of small business failures.  Similarly, without fiscal relief, state 
and local governments will need to institute significant austerity measures that will slow the 
recovery.  We saw this dynamic play out following the last recession, and cutbacks to the state 
and local governments slowed the recovery for several years. 
Second, the global dimension of the pandemic poses particular risks.  Weak global 
demand, supply chain disruptions, and geopolitical turmoil all threaten to be sources of 
additional downside shocks in coming years.  Again, the recovery from the last recession is 
instructive when the euro crisis hit just as the global recovery was getting traction. 
Finally, for the time being, I have not assumed any changes to the long-run fundamentals 
of the economy, the so-called stars.  A key goal of our policy actions, along with those of other 
government agencies, has been to minimize the scarring effects of the crisis on the long-run 
health of the economy.  Despite these extraordinary efforts, the medium-term risk to potential 
output and r* are most likely to the downside. 
June 9–10, 2020
160 of 270


 
 
 
In terms of the outlook for inflation, much like the Tealbook, I see core inflation coming 
in very low this year, around 1 percent, but then starting the gradual march toward 2 percent over 
the next few years.  I see core inflation at 1.5 percent next year and around 1.75 percent in the 
year after.  The uncertainty around this forecast is particularly large, given the enormous supply 
and demand implications of the pandemic, and tilted to the downside, in line with the 
prominence of downside risk to the outlook for economic activity. 
Now, a critical assumption in my forecast of a lengthy but eventual full recovery and a 
return of inflation to 2 percent over coming years is that monetary policy will continue to provide 
strong support for the economy both during the acute phase of the pandemic and throughout the 
recovery.  I assumed that we use all of our policy tools to achieve our goals of eliminating 
shortfalls from maximum employment and inflation averaging 2 percent.  In particular, I 
assumed that the target federal funds rate stays at the current level well past the end of the 
forecast horizon, and we use a combination of strong forward guidance and asset purchases in 
support of our goals.  More on that tomorrow. 
And the final thing I would just like to mention, Mr. Chair—I really appreciate having 
the videoconference set up the way this has.  It’s been a very long day, but it’s been great to 
actually see people and interact a little bit.  And I would like to thank Governor Quarles for not 
actually cooking, preparing some s’mores in front of us, which would have been very painful. 
[Laughter] 
But I do have one concern that you should be aware of, and maybe this is something for 
Jim and Matt Luecke to look into.  I just want to know whether Governor Bowman’s cat has 
signed the information security forms, because, you know, we just want to make sure 
everybody’s following the rules.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
June 9–10, 2020
161 of 270


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you, and thank everyone for your comments.   
As we navigate these uncharted economic waters, we continue to be reminded of just 
how little we know and how much uncertainty there is about the outlook or even about the 
current position of the economy.  A general expectation among forecasters has been that the 
shutdown would lead to an unprecedented contraction in the second-quarter economic activity as 
the virus is brought under control and the curve flattened.  The contraction would then reverse as 
the economy reopened, beginning around the middle of the year.  The third quarter would show 
growth returning at a rapid rate, but the recovery would struggle to reach pre-crisis levels of 
activity as people returned to certain kinds of activity only gradually and as a significant portion 
of the newly laid-off workers struggled to find jobs.  This relatively positive path assumes that 
the pandemic subsides and doesn’t resurge.  A major resurgence would put us on a significantly 
worse trajectory. 
Now, all of this has seemed sensible to me, although the timing and the magnitudes of the 
recovery are obviously highly uncertain.  In that way of thinking about things, the May 
unemployment rate would have shown continued job losses as foreshadowed by still-high initial 
claims, the ADP payroll report, and other indicators.  Instead, the May report will go on the 
books as the biggest data surprise in memory—the private sector adding 3 million jobs, offset by 
public-sector losses of about 0.5 million; employment gains were widespread, with the biggest 
gains in sectors that had been most affected in March and April; 1.7 million people returned to 
the labor force, the unemployment rate fell, and the employment-to-population rate rose. 
A critical issue is how much signal to take from this surprisingly positive report.  Is this 
just about timing, with jobs coming back in mid-May rather than June or July?  Or does this 
June 9–10, 2020
162 of 270


 
 
 
report presage a shallower recession and a faster recovery?  I do not know.  And perhaps there is 
truth in both, as is often the case. 
Nevertheless, as a practical matter, I think we are well served to lean to the first 
explanation, insisting on more evidence of sustained improvement.  We should be very cautious 
about overreacting to one positive report.  And it’s good to hear many of you echo that, because 
a hint of premature celebration could threaten the hard-won gains in market function and 
sentiment that are now supporting economic activity by households and businesses. 
This is well-covered ground, but the economy was at a near stand-still in March and 
April.  The staff projects 35 percent annualized shrinkage in the second quarter—an all-time 
record, certainly, for any living person.  Now, as the economy reopens, it’s reasonable to expect 
a bottom, and that may already be happening.  Social-distancing restrictions have eased across 
the country.  People are venturing out more, and they’re going further.  Many businesses are 
resuming operations, though to varying degrees. 
We see it in many of the softer indicators.  Online bookings for restaurants are up off 
their “zero lower bound.”  Geolocation data show that more people are on the move, and we’re 
seeing more trips to so-called nonessential retail stores.  Applications for new businesses are up, 
and auto sales are up.  Hotel occupancy is grinding higher, and TSA and company reports show 
that air travel is increasing.  Freight rail measures are improving.  Of course, there’s no sense that 
all is well.  These are early signs.  The energy patch remains a weak spot, and state and local 
governments continue to cut jobs. 
Moreover, the fiscal response so far has been both large, at 14 percent of GDP, and 
timely by historical standards.  Data show that the stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment 
insurance are at least replacing lost income from wages.  PPP is supporting small businesses and 
June 9–10, 2020
163 of 270


 
 
 
keeping workers on payrolls.  In addition, our lending facilities have been supporting the flow of 
credit to households, business, and state and local governments. 
It looks like the economy’s moving in the right direction, and perhaps sooner than 
expected.  But, as many of you have pointed out, while the job gains in May were a remarkable 
and positive surprise, the net changes since February remain shockingly bad.  Using the 
household survey data, 21 million people are still unemployed.  There are another 4.8 million 
who are actually unemployed but miscoded.  And a sudden drop in labor force participation 
shows that there are another 4 million who are suddenly out of the labor force.  Surely these 
people are overwhelmingly unemployed as opposed to having decided to spend more time 
at home. 
The total size of the problem is close to 30 million workers, which is close to 25 million 
above, maybe 24 million above where we were in February.  And I’ll echo something I guess 
Loretta said earlier, which is, even if we do get outsized job gains, which seems likely, frankly, 
in the remainder of the year, it also seems quite likely that close to 10 million people will not 
find work quickly.  And these are low-paid, low-wage service workers who deal directly with the 
public in parts of the economy that may not recovery so quickly.  That’s as many people as lost 
jobs in the entire Global Financial Crisis. 
The problem that awaits us is really that problem.  And I think it’s one reason why I’ve 
been speaking up about fiscal policy.  I do think we need to be keeping that in mind as we look 
forward.  These are terrible numbers—the true unemployment rate being close to 20 percent.  
And we face a long and challenging road to full recovery, which is likely to occur only when 
people are confident that it’s safe to reengage in a broad range of economic activities, and that 
could take a while. 
June 9–10, 2020
164 of 270


 
 
 
What’s more, with mandatory social distancing waning and rising impatience with these 
measures all over, there’s a risk of local and regional spikes or even a national second wave of 
COVID-19.  While the reimposition of a national shutdown seems very unlikely to me, even the 
lesser evil of a wave of regional spikes would likely mean a slower reopening and a loss of 
public confidence that it’s safe to resume activity. 
To wrap up, I continue to see that monetary policy will need to be highly accommodative 
for some time.  Like almost all of you, I see the risks to growth as weighted to the downside and 
those for unemployment weighted to the upside.  We all see the risks to inflation as weighted to 
the downside.  And I’m close to the median forecast out there of a slow recovery of inflation. 
Tomorrow at the press conference I plan to reiterate that we’re committed to using our 
full range of tools to support the economy, and that we expect to keep the policy rate near zero 
until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our 
maximum-employment and price-stability goals.  I will acknowledge the welcome May jobs 
report and some of the softer indicators as well, but I will be clear that there is no complacency 
on the part of the Committee, and that we remain strongly committed to using our tools to 
support the economy and believe that that will be necessary for some time.   
I’m looking forward to our discussion tomorrow.  And now, before we part, I will turn it 
over to Rochelle to introduce tomorrow’s policy discussion.  Over to you, Rochelle.  Thank you. 
MS. EDGE.6  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I will be referring to the exhibit on 
page 55 of your briefing materials packet.  With the federal funds rate at the effective 
lower bound, associated forward guidance in place, and substantial ongoing asset 
purchases, policymakers may judge that the current setting of monetary policy 
remains appropriate for the time being.  Additionally, considerable uncertainty 
surrounds the economic outlook at present. 
Because a clearer assessment of the outlook would put the Committee in a better 
position to evaluate its policy stance and communications, you may see this meeting 
 
6 The materials used by Ms. Edge are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
June 9–10, 2020
165 of 270


 
 
 
as an opportunity to discuss future potential policy actions, as you continue to assess 
how the coronavirus and associated economic policies are shaping your views of the 
outlook.  In light of these considerations, only a single draft policy statement has been 
prepared for this meeting. 
Against this backdrop, I thought that it might be useful for me to discuss what a 
couple of scenarios, currently seen by the staff as equally plausible, might imply for 
potential forward-guidance communications.  I will draw on the optimal control 
simulations presented in the “Monetary Policy Strategies” section of Tealbook A and 
also reported in the memo that Matthias discussed this morning. 
As noted in the top-left panel, optimal control simulations solve for the optimal 
path of the federal funds rate.  In doing so, they rely on three inputs:  a loss function 
that is intended to capture policymaker preferences; an outlook for the economy 
around which the simulation is performed; and a macroeconomic model that 
characterizes the relationships between the federal funds rate and other key variables, 
particularly those variables that enter the loss function. 
For the simulations shown in the exhibit, I consider two different economic 
outlooks, the Tealbook baseline and the “Second Waves” alternative scenario; 
consider two different assumptions about policymakers’ preferences; and use the 
FRB/US model.  Both the Tealbook baseline and “Second Waves” scenario 
incorporate asset purchases made through June.  Thereafter, the simulations present 
optimal paths of the federal funds rate, taking as given the evolution of the balance 
sheet as assumed in the Tealbook A baseline economic forecast. 
The black solid lines in the middle row of the chart plot the paths of the nominal 
federal funds rate, unemployment rate, and core PCE inflation given in this round’s 
Tealbook baseline.  The blue dot-dash lines show optimal control results that obtain 
when policymakers consider it equally important to keep total PCE inflation close to 
the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, to keep the unemployment rate close to the 
staff’s estimate of the natural rate, and to avoid abrupt changes in the federal funds 
rate. 
Under this loss function—called the “equal weights” loss function—the federal 
funds rate lifts off from the lower bound in the third quarter of 2022, with this date 
shown by the blue vertical lines.  As summarized in the first row of the top-right 
table, liftoff occurs just after the unemployment rate reaches 5.2 percent—
0.4 percentage point above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at that time—and 
just after core PCE inflation reaches 1.5 percent.  However, the equal-weights loss 
function may not precisely align with how policymakers weigh deviations from their 
maximum-employment and price-stability objectives.  It may also fail to capture risk-
management concerns, such as policymakers’ desire to insure against the possibility 
that inflation expectations could drift lower as a result of the effective lower bound. 
A loss function that assigns no cost to the unemployment rate being below its 
natural rate can be used to reflect some of these considerations even if it is not the 
June 9–10, 2020
166 of 270


 
 
 
true depiction of policymakers’ preferences.  This loss function, which places an 
asymmetric weight on the unemployment gap, is one that we frequently use for 
optimal control simulations in the Tealbook. 
The red dashed line in the middle-left chart shows the path of the federal funds 
rate that—conditional on the Tealbook baseline—minimizes the asymmetric-weight 
loss function.  The red dashed lines in the other two charts in the middle row show the 
corresponding paths of the unemployment rate and core PCE inflation.  In this 
simulation, the federal funds rate lifts off from the lower bound in the third quarter of 
2024, with this date shown by the red vertical lines.  As summarized in the second 
row of the top-right table, liftoff occurs just after the unemployment rate reaches 
3.2 percent and when core PCE inflation is 2.1 percent.  These paths of 
unemployment and inflation bear a strong similarity to those that Matthias showed 
this morning when discussing a forward-guidance specification that sets a 2.25 percent 
threshold for core inflation.  This similarity reflects the possibility that, in some 
circumstances, different forward guidance thresholds can correspond to different 
policymaker loss functions. 
The charts in the bottom row of the exhibit report the results of the simulations 
conditioned on the May Tealbook’s “Second Waves” scenario.  The black solid lines 
plot the baseline paths of key variables for this scenario, while the blue dot-dashed 
lines show optimal-control results obtained under the equal-weights loss function.  
The blue vertical lines in this row of charts indicate the time of liftoff, which occurs 
in the third quarter of 2027.  As summarized in the third row of the top-right table, in 
this simulation, liftoff occurs just after the unemployment rate reaches 3.3 percent and 
when core PCE inflation is 1.6 percent.  For reference, the red dashed lines in the 
bottom row of charts report a similar simulation but with the loss function that places 
an asymmetric weight on the unemployment rate gap.  The red vertical lines report 
the timing of liftoff. 
Note that, as shown in the top-right table, for the same loss function, liftoff for 
simulations based around the “Second Waves” scenario occurs 5 to 5.5 years later 
than for simulations based around the Tealbook baseline.  In addition, liftoff occurs 
with unemployment rates that are 1.75 to 2 percentage points lower and inflation rates 
that are as much as 0.3 percentage point higher.  These large differences in timing and 
outcomes highlight one of the challenges posed by the uncertainty that surrounds the 
economic outlook. 
In discussing how the Tealbook’s optimal control simulations can be informative 
regarding forward guidance, I have focused solely on liftoff timing and liftoff 
conditions.  However, optimal-control simulations imply a full path of policy rates, 
which means that the policy rate path after liftoff is equally important.  Hence, 
optimal control simulations can also help inform forward guidance regarding the path 
of the federal funds rate after liftoff. 
Thank you, Chair Powell.  That concludes my prepared remarks.  Pages 56 to 60 
of the briefing materials packet present the April 29 statement and the draft statement 
June 9–10, 2020
167 of 270


 
 
 
and draft implementation note.  Thomas, Trevor, and I would be happy to take any 
questions.   
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you, Rochelle.  So, questions?  Does anyone have a question?  
Jim Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Okay.  I’m just trying to absorb this here.  So 
the “Second Waves” scenario, if I’m reading this correctly, has unemployment going back to 
14 percent in 2021, and yet the liftoff gets pushed way out.  Am I reading this correctly?  Four 
years relative to the no-second-wave scenario? 
So you might say, okay, unemployment goes up to 14 percent, comes down, and goes 
back up.  But now, somehow the recovery is way worse, I guess, is what you’re saying.  You can 
see this in the line in the—comparing the two middle graphs.  The unemployment rate is much 
slower to come down in that scenario.  So that’s in the model, I guess? 
MS. EDGE.  I think there are two reasons why it’s different.  So the liftoff is about five to 
five and a half years later in the “Second Waves” scenario.  I think two things are going on:  It’s 
both the path of the unemployment rate and then it’s also the path of inflation. 
So if you compare the Tealbook baseline and the “Second Waves” scenario, I think—so 
this is before one starts doing the optimal control simulations.  I mean, the timing is for liftoff in 
the scenario itself.  I think the timing difference is about three years later.  This difference comes 
just from following the policy rule specification used in the Tealbook forecast, with the 
specification being that the policy rate lifts off after the unemployment rate falls below 4.3 
percent.  So I guess then there is an extra two years of liftoff-timing differences in the optimal 
control simulations, and so it’s the unemployment rate path.  But it’s also that there is the lower 
inflation path in the second wave scenario. 
MR. BULLARD.  I see.  Thank you. 
June 9–10, 2020
168 of 270


 
 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Sorry.  This might be a dumb question.  Why, in the “Second Waves” 
scenario, does core inflation come back so quickly?  Is that because of supply constraints, or is 
that because of an announced policy that increases expectations? 
MS. EDGE.  So, inflation comes back so quickly in the asymmetric-weights scenario 
because the unemployment rate does go pretty low.  I mean, it’s going down to unprecedented 
levels, below 2 percent in this scenario.  The other thing is that this is being run with the version 
of the FRB/US model which has model-consistent expectations for asset prices and for prices 
and wages.  So they are very forward looking and see the gaps in the unemployment rate relative 
to the natural rate for a long time in the future. 
MR. BARKIN.  So it anticipates our lengthy time at the lower bound and therefore 
increases inflation expectations, which then increases core inflation.  Thank you.  
CHAIR POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Just because we spent some time on this, I thought it would—so, in the 
second wave, the unemployment rate goes up, it hangs up, and then it comes down slowly.  I 
have no difficulty believing that in the economy.  I just wonder, in the model, do you have 
bankruptcies?  I mean, second time through—there must be a shocking number of businesses 
that can’t survive that.  They’re fragile and all of that, and I would think that the financial 
fragility and other things would be pretty devastating.  I don’t know how directly that’s taken 
into account in FRB/US or things, but you must have proxies, or maybe you have it exactly. 
MS. EDGE.  So— 
MR. LAUBACH.  I was just wondering whether maybe we should let Stacey or Bill 
weigh in on this particular question. 
June 9–10, 2020
169 of 270


 
 
 
MR. WASCHER.  Okay.  So the answer is, it’s part of our story.  It’s not explicitly in the 
model, but it’s part of our story.  And so we’ve built in a bigger negative shock from the second 
wave, because we do think that a second wave will cause more financial stresses. 
MR. EVANS.  Yes.  No, that makes sense.  I understand. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Further questions?  President Daly.  
MS. DALY.  Sorry, I’m making everybody miserable, but I want to go back to Tom’s 
question, Rochelle.  So I understand how this works, that agents just expect this, and so they 
build it in.  But what would it take to get the very positive outcome of inflation returning to our 
target in the second wave, which is arguably a way worse situation?  How can we get that in no-
second-wave?  Because the simulations you’ve given us are a worse outcome on inflation with a 
better outcome on health.  So what policy do we need to do to get the good outcome of the 
second-wave pictures on inflation? 
MS. EDGE.  The outcome in which inflation is coming back more rapidly is the 
asymmetric—  
MS. DALY.  Right.  I was just curious.  What would it take? 
MS. EDGE.  So, I mean, in the— 
MS. DALY.  If I’ve asked a stupid question, feel free to say so.  But I just—I’m really 
sort of struggling with why we wouldn’t want that good outcome in the first row of pictures.   
MR. REEVE.  President Daly, this is Trevor.  I think you would want those outcomes 
very much.  But I think, coming back to Rochelle’s earlier comments in response to President 
Barkin, that is a feature of the model that really is leaning very, very heavily on the highly 
forward-looking behavior of price and wage setters that I think many of us find stretches the 
limits of credibility in the current environment.  And so, in the Monetary Policy Strategies 
June 9–10, 2020
170 of 270


 
 
 
section of Tealbook A, which routinely features these simulations, we often have a paragraph or 
two on some of the caveats to the effect that the world may not quite work that way, especially in 
these unprecedented circumstances. 
So if you did not have that degree of forward-looking behavior, then in order to 
ultimately generate inflation outcomes that get back to your 2 percent goal, you would actually 
need to engineer a much greater undershoot of the unemployment rate from its natural rate, 
right?  You would demonstrate the achievement of the inflation goal through really tightening 
the real economy to a much greater extent than is evident in these very forward-looking models. 
That’s the feature of a lot of models, so it kind of is what it is.  But it’s something we do 
like to point out as something that you may not want to draw too firm of conclusions on and may 
not want to base your policy actions completely around that.  I’m not exactly sure about the 
differences between the middle and lower panels, but I presume what matters a lot in this is the 
entire time horizon over which this optimization problem is being computed, which is leading to 
different paths of the variables in question. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Governor Brainard, please. 
MS. BRAINARD.  I think just a quick clarifying question.  As I understand it, the loss 
function has deviations on either side of 2 percent being equally weighted, and so that must be 
why we have that difference between the “Second Waves” scenario and the baseline scenario, 
right?  It’s actually a worse outcome.  It’s actually viewed as a worse outcome from a loss 
function that penalizes deviations on the upside and the downside.  Is that correct? 
MS. EDGE.  Yes.  So it’s the same loss.  It penalizes deviations equally.  That’s correct. 
June 9–10, 2020
171 of 270


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  Okay.  That makes sense.  So what I’m considering to be a good outcome is 
actually what the model considers to be a negative outcome.  Got it.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Which kind of raises the question, maybe we should put an 
asymmetric loss function on inflation.  Anyway, interesting discussion.  Further questions? 
MR. CLARIDA.  Mr. Chair, if I could— 
CHAIR POWELL.  I can’t see you, Rich.  Sorry.  Go ahead.  
MR. CLARIDA.  Okay? 
CHAIR POWELL.  Yes. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Good.  All right.  If I could, just on this point, I think the real issue for 
us is that a lot of times these models assume away our biggest challenge.  They assume inflation 
expectations begin well anchored and stay well anchored, notwithstanding the biggest hit the 
economy has taken in 80 years.  And we get paid the big bucks to actually think about the case in 
which we actually want to run a policy that would keep them well anchored.  So if I would 
editorialize, I’ll leave it at that. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Further questions?  [No response]  Okay.  That concludes our 
business for today.  Thanks, everybody.  That was great.  I’m sorry that we won’t be in the 
elegant West Court Café tonight, but one day soon we’ll be back there.  So we’ll adjourn for 
today and resume at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow morning for the policy go-round.  Everyone have a 
great night.  Stay safe. 
[Meeting recessed] 
 
 
June 9–10, 2020
172 of 270


 
 
 
June 10 Session 
 
CHAIR POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  Welcome.  Before we begin the policy go-
round, let’s hear from Stacey for a brief update on this morning’s data.  Stacey. 
MS. TEVLIN.  Good morning.  This morning’s CPI data came in a little softer than we’d 
anticipated.  Both the total CPI and the core CPI fell 0.1 percent in May.  So for core CPI, that 
brought the 12-month change down to 1.2 percent, and for total CPI, the 12-month change was 
just 0.1 percent.  Both of these figures are about 0.1 percentage point lower than we projected. 
In general, the declines continued in the same categories that we’ve seen in previous 
months, which are the ones that we think are most vulnerable to social distancing.  I’m talking 
about apparel, lodging away from home, airfares, and car insurance.  And then, in the meantime, 
we also saw another strong increase in food prices, though not quite as strong as in April.  I 
would note that even though this was another month of decline in core—and that’s unusual to see 
three months in a row—the decline was less pronounced than in April and May, so these 
categories appear like they may be close to stabilizing. 
And then I guess, finally, I’d just say that, despite the pickup in economic activity in 
May, it doesn’t seem like it has quite shown up in prices yet.  So that’s all I was going to say on 
the CPI. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Great.  Thank you.  Any questions for Stacey?  [No response]  Okay, 
thank you.  Seeing none, we’ll proceed to our policy go-round, and we’ll begin with Governor 
Clarida, please. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I support the draft statement and directive as 
written.  As I pointed out at our previous meeting, I do believe that our existing guidance on the 
pace and rationale for our Treasury security and agency MBS purchases does need to evolve, 
June 9–10, 2020
173 of 270


 
 
 
now that we have largely restored market functioning.  This statement does so and in a way that 
will preserve our optionality to make more significant changes to our balance sheet policy later if 
we feel, after receiving more data on the economy, that this is warranted to help us best achieve 
our objectives. 
From the Desk surveys and market commentary, it does appear that the pace of purchases 
that we are agreeing to today—roughly $80 billion a month for the Treasury security 
purchases—is in line with market expectations and should serve the aim of sustaining the 
improvement in market functioning and the transmission to broader financial conditions that we 
have achieved since the severe turbulence we experienced in March.  Of course, it is difficult to 
know with any precision exactly what minimum level of purchases would be sufficient for these 
goals, but I suspect that that number is positive, and I support the Desk recommendation as 
embodied in the statement and the directive. 
I also support the decision to leave the language on rate guidance and the balance of risks 
to the outlook unchanged.  Although the reference to “medium term” resides in the balance-of-
risks sentence in paragraph 3, it was immediately taken, after the April meeting, in markets as a 
form of guidance about the path of the policy rate.  In any event, of course, as we’ve discussed, 
market pricing indicates essentially a zero chance that we will hike rates anytime over the next 
18 months, and, of course, this comports with our SEP, which will be released this afternoon.  
Moreover, this is “big tent” language, which I view as a virtue in that it preserves our optionality 
to make more significant changes to our rate guidance later in the year if we feel at that time it is 
warranted to help us best achieve our objectives. 
As I pointed out at our April meeting, our existing guidance—that rates are on hold until 
we’re on track to achieve our objective—is serving us well today, but it may at some point need 
June 9–10, 2020
174 of 270


 
 
 
to be reconsidered.  “On track,” to me—and, I suspect, to others—is indicative of a forecast-
based threshold, which, of course, would trigger rate hikes even if inflation at the time were 
below 2 percent.  This, of course, was the situation that the Committee faced in December 2015.  
And I should say, at the time, as a Fed watcher, I supported that decision. 
Given the empirical record of PCE inflation consistently falling short of our objective, 
there’s a risk—and I think there’s a real risk—that inflation expectations could continue to drift 
lower.  And I would point out that, in the staff’s estimate of expected inflation obtained from the 
TIPS market—and this is after adjusting for liquidity and term premium effects—sort of their 
pure read on expected inflation from TIPS for CPI inflation is running at about 1.75 percent, and 
that’s down from about 2.5 percent several months ago.  So that metric has moved down a lot.  
And in such circumstances, we might choose to offer guidance, as we discussed yesterday, that 
rates are on hold until we actually achieve 2 percent inflation over some horizon.  If we went 
down that road, I think it would be appropriate to refine and amend the consensus statement to 
empower that possibility. 
But this is a discussion not for today, and I repeat that I fully support our decision in the 
statement and the directive.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly, please. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support the statement as written.  Our actions and 
policies are providing critical support in this challenging time.  These challenges won’t end 
anytime soon, and under almost any scenario for the virus, the economic recovery will require 
continued vigorous support to meet our dual-mandate goals. 
Now, the optimal control simulations presented by Rochelle yesterday make clear the 
steep uphill climb we face.  They document considerable economic headwinds and the forceful 
June 9–10, 2020
175 of 270


 
 
 
policy response that is needed to achieve full employment and price stability.  In these 
simulations, at least the way I read them, we achieve 2 percent inflation in a reasonable time 
frame only if we aggressively respond to the unemployment gap and tolerate sustained, modest 
overshooting of our inflation target.  Moreover, for this strategy to work, as embedded in the 
assumptions of the model we saw yesterday, businesses and consumers must believe that the Fed 
is fully committed to achieving the dual-mandate goals. 
The discussions of these simulations only strengthened my view—and I will say what 
Governor Clarida just said—that we need to finalize our framework review and release a long-
run consensus statement that clearly states our commitment to achieving 2 percent inflation on 
average.  I know that’s for another day, but I think it’s an important thing for us to do, because it 
serves as a commitment that we will have a solid foundation for all of the policy actions we take 
as we have to fight the virus and the economic effect. 
So, turning to those specific policy actions that I assume we’re going to need to take, the 
SEP shows—and our go-round yesterday confirms—that few expect a quick withdrawal of 
monetary accommodation.  And so far—and I would emphasize “so far”—the views of market 
participants are aligned and also expecting a long spell at the ELB.  But, as many others noted 
yesterday and I did as well, markets can be fickle and erratic and have historically surprised us 
when they move out of alignment with our own sense of the future path of policy.  So I would 
like to see us move to some form of outcome-based or state-based forward guidance in coming 
months that ties policy adjustments to specific mile markers toward our dual-mandate goals. 
Of course, any forward guidance should be coordinated with a statement of our projected 
balance sheet actions.  And here I agree with President Kashkari and Vice Chair Williams that 
our policy tools are likely to be most successful when we can communicate their use toward a 
June 9–10, 2020
176 of 270


 
 
 
single set of goals.  Putting forward a unified package of policies will be more effective than one 
at a time and then having market participants and households not know how they’re related.  I 
think that’s one of the reasons we’ve had such success with the ones we’ve released so far—that 
everything has been aligned, and we came with them collectively.  In an ideal world—which I’m 
sure, Chair Powell, you dream of recurring again and again—our forward guidance, the SEP, and 
our lending programs and asset purchases would all be aligned to convey to markets, businesses, 
and households that we are committed to doing what it takes to return the economy to its 
pre-COVID-19 state as quickly as possible. 
So let me say one final thing about speed.  Over the decade preceding COVID-19, we 
learned that there is no immutable bright line between cyclical and structural.  While it’s true that 
hotel clerks don’t become coders overnight, the labor market is much more flexible than we’ve 
given it credit for.  With time and the right incentives, employers shift the requirements, and 
workers shift their skills.  Our role is to provide the economic environment that creates 
opportunity and incentivizes these shifts.  That’s one of the key lessons that we took from the 
Fed Listens events.  When the labor market is consistently good, employers increase their search 
efforts and take another look at the potential of applicants.  The result is, less advantaged and 
dislocated workers get jobs, and growth becomes more inclusive.  This ultimately, of course, 
boosts our potential output. 
So, in sum, the support we have provided to the economy has helped carry us through the 
initial crisis.  Now we have a short break to assess the effectiveness of our first response and the 
start of the reopening of our economy.  But given the range of plausible outcomes, it is almost 
certain that we will need to do more to support a full economic recovery.  And given that the 
risks remain tilted to the downside and we are constrained by the ELB, in my mind we should err 
June 9–10, 2020
177 of 270


 
 
 
on the side of doing more and doing it boldly and earlier rather than waiting and doing less later.  
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren, please. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support today’s policy option.  While the 
data, given the pandemic, are noisy, there is a risk of persistently high unemployment and low 
inflation.  Given the large misses on both elements of the dual mandate, the need for a highly 
accommodative policy is clear. 
Treasury rates are already quite low, and even with the rise in rates accompanying the 
better-than-expected employment report, the five-year yield is below 50 basis points.  While I 
strongly support forward guidance that promises to purchase securities over the next year, our 
biggest problem is no longer the levels of Treasury and MBS rates, but rather the interest rate 
spreads of risky assets relative to safe assets.  The elevated risk spreads reflect the great 
uncertainty we are facing.  If loan losses rise and more firms fail, as I expect, these spreads may 
widen even further. 
Ideally, we could act like other countries and purchase more private securities to reduce 
the spreads.  Given the Federal Reserve’s legal limitations on open market operations, the 
elevated risk spreads need to be addressed with our 13(3) facilities.  Over time, reducing spreads 
through our lending facilities may do more for the cost of funds that households and firms face 
than will substantial additional purchases of Treasuries.  This is not to say we should not actively 
engage in QE, but rather we should be attentive to how we make our 13(3) facilities more 
attractive so that the low cost of funds translates into lower total costs for households and firms.  
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker, please. 
June 9–10, 2020
178 of 270


 
 
 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support the statement as written.  In terms of 
communicating our forward guidance, the tremendous uncertainty over how the economy will 
evolve and what the new normal will look like makes, to me, date-based forward guidance more 
attractive than outcome-based forward guidance for now.  I understand, and I’m very 
sympathetic to, the arguments for an outcome-based approach.  But I believe, for the time being, 
basing our policy rate path on thresholds that could be unattainable may not be the most sensible 
way of communicating the likely path of the funds rate. 
Once we complete the monetary policy framework process and the consensus statement, 
I’d be open to revisiting this stance.  But for now, I continue to support the statement that we 
remain at the lower bound for the foreseeable future and then leave the rest open ended until we 
revisit this later.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard, please. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  We remain at or near the height of the initial 
phase of the crisis in economic terms, but past the initial phase in health terms.  Q2 GDP growth 
is likely to be the worst in the postwar era by a factor of 3 or 4.  Employment remains far below 
its levels at the beginning of this year.  A large portion of these workers see themselves as on 
temporary layoff.  This makes a lot of sense, given the nature of this shock and that many of 
these workers will likely return to work in the weeks and months ahead. 
Downside risks, as the Committee emphasized yesterday, are very substantial.  I put them 
in two broad categories—the possibility that the pandemic crisis morphs into a financial crisis 
and the possibility that widespread business failure leads to a depression.  Avoiding these 
possibilities depends on risk management across the individual units in the economy at the 
household level, the firm level, and nonprofits.  They need to find methods of protecting the 
June 9–10, 2020
179 of 270


 
 
 
most vulnerable people as well as possible while producing goods and services in the safest 
manner that they can. 
This is occurring today and is a chaotic process, as should be expected in the middle of a 
crisis.  However, firms, nonprofits, and workers have strong incentives to restore their revenue 
streams and simultaneously manage the COVID-19 risk.  These entities manage other types of 
mortality risk every day, so, in principle, this can be done. 
One lesson that we’ve learned already is that work from home is powerful.  The U.S. 
economy is ostensibly shut down, but during the second quarter it will produce approximately 
90 percent of what it produced when it was not shut down.  Either this is mismeasurement or it’s 
a miracle of the modern age. 
Meanwhile, inflation is low, and inflation is expected to remain low.  The policy rate is 
set at the effective-lower-bound level that we used for many years following the financial crisis.  
Expectations are for the policy rate remain low.  Longer-term interest rates remain low.  So the 
silver lining in the crisis is that we have a relatively easy decision to make today:  Keep the rate 
where it is.  And, accordingly, I support the draft statement. 
I do not think that the story today about the economy is about monetary policy.  I think 
it’s all about the pandemic still and the evolution of the pandemic.  It’s like being in a war:  In a 
war, the news from the front drives financial markets, and I think we’re very much in a similar 
situation today. 
Decisions, however, in the meetings ahead may become more nuanced, and we may want 
to return to the Committee’s A-, B-, and C-style options, as it may be valuable to test with 
alt-A and alt-C how the Committee would provide different levels of accommodation as the 
economy continues to evolve in the third quarter. 
June 9–10, 2020
180 of 270


 
 
 
I want to finish with just a brief comment on the inexplicable jobs report.  Research at the 
St. Louis Fed by Max Dvorkin did suggest a substantial jobs gain in the May report, with more to 
come in June.  For those who are interested, there is a blog post on this, all based on publicly 
available data.  It used the Homebase data set, which is a real-time measure of employment.  The 
correlation with CPS data is quite high, and that correlation was used to predict a large jobs gain 
in the CPS survey—uncanny accuracy, within a few hundred thousand of the actual number. 
It shows a couple of things, I think that these new data sources may be very valuable in 
the current environment.  It also shows that this shock is very different from other ones that we 
have experienced, and it’s not a good idea to simply go back to other big shocks that have 
occurred in the past and assume that those are going to give you a good idea about how the 
economy is going to evolve this time around.  I did think that the staff did a good job yesterday 
and in the Tealbook of incorporating some of these ideas, and I look forward to more of that. 
Oh—and, finally, I do want to agree with President Daly.  She suggested that we go 
ahead and finish the framework review.  I think that is the intent.  But I think it would now be a 
good time to go ahead and get that done.  We can’t let it linger too long, and I think there’s 
probably a pretty good consensus about what we need to do around the table.  So I’d encourage 
you, Mr. Chair, to push that forward.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic, please. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I fully support the draft policy statement as 
written.  Given the tremendous uncertainty and prevalence of risks that remain, I think it is very 
premature to be adding anything along the lines of more guidance on future policy beyond what 
is in the statement draft.  And this is in line with the view expressed by the Chair in yesterday’s 
discussion. 
June 9–10, 2020
181 of 270


 
 
 
The dot plots in the SEP will, of course, inevitably be interpreted as forward guidance.  I 
will say that I actually would have preferred to have skipped the SEP this time around, though 
I’m not that uncomfortable with the narrative that, for now, the Committee perceives the modal 
case to be zero rates as far ahead as the eye can see. 
I have no argument with calls to refine forward guidance and finish the framework 
review.  Both are definitely needed.  But I think that is best done after we have more clarity on 
the pathway of the recovery. 
So, in my view, I think there should be three main messages coming out of this meeting.  
One, the environment is too uncertain to make reasonable projections about the path of the 
economy in the near term.  Two, policy will be dependent on how the economic picture evolves.  
And, three, we will do whatever it takes to support the recovery. 
I am in favor of resisting today the drumbeat for us to be more explicit about additional 
actions we might take down the road.  But I would also resist any calls for speculation about 
what normalization might look like regarding the process and timing of winding down either the 
balance sheet expansion or the 13(3) facilities. 
I think that the Chair’s message that we think monetary policy is in a good place, that we 
will not be in a hurry to remove any support that currently exists, and that we will act as needed 
has been extremely useful.  I would like us to stick to that message.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan, please. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I agree with the draft statement as written, and I 
support it.  I’m mindful that current policy rates are low and are expected to remain low for some 
time, and, obviously, the SEP will reinforce that.  I’m also mindful that Treasury yields along the 
June 9–10, 2020
182 of 270


 
 
 
curve are relatively low, which suggests to me that there’s limited scope at this point to do a lot 
to lower Treasury yields from here and provide more monetary accommodation, at least today. 
As long as this health-care crisis continues to be the primary driver of the weight on 
activity, I think monetary policy has a role to play, but it’s not as important as what the Fed is 
doing in providing, through its 13(3) programs, liquidity to businesses, households, 
municipalities, and the financial markets.  And maybe echoing a little bit of what President 
Rosengren said, I think the action may be more with the 13(3) programs in the near term and 
medium term than with doing substantially more in terms of buying Treasury securities.  I also 
think fiscal policy, as we’ve said publicly, is critical to prevent this health-care crisis from 
morphing into a broader economic crisis. 
Having said all of that, as the health-care crisis recedes and we get more clarity on what 
these recessionary dynamics are in the economy that are preventing it from returning to potential, 
it will be important to provide sufficient policy accommodation through both forward guidance 
and the balance sheet.  Forward guidance and asset purchases, I believe, should be used at some 
point to make sure that shorter- and long-term interest rates remain low and employment and 
inflation are well on their way back to meet our objectives. 
As we go through the next few months, what I’m wrestling with is the risk that we don’t 
do enough versus the risk that, in some areas, we do too much.  And also, I’m mindful—and I 
share this view with my team on this—that while there are risks to the downside, I think there are 
also substantial upside possibilities, and I want to make sure we’re balanced in our approach and 
don’t get so pessimistic that we justify doing maybe more than we should.  So, what’s the worry 
I have about that?  Monetary policy accommodation at this stage, I think, is not free.  It could 
June 9–10, 2020
183 of 270


 
 
 
well encourage undue risk-taking, and it’s hard to believe that in June of this year we’re talking 
about that.  But I’m already seeing risks of that here, so I’m just mindful of it.  
There’s a risk of keeping “zombie” companies from getting restructured, which would be 
better for the companies, better for the workers, and better for the economy.  And I think there’s 
some question about whether that’s happening sufficiently. 
I’m also concerned that if we overdo it, it will discourage or mute dynamism.  So my 
own view will be to try to take a balanced approach and, in some areas of our monetary policy, 
even be restrained.  But I do think the key tools in middle of the action right now are these 13(3) 
programs as well as our forward guidance.  And there’ll be time later, as we get more clarity, to 
give more guidance on what we’re going to do on our balance sheet.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin, please. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Uncertainty is high today on multiple 
dimensions, including the path of the virus, the response of our public health officials, the fiscal 
path forward, and the reactions of consumers and firms.  In that context, I do worry the memo’s 
positioning on future asset purchases might be a bit premature.  I recognize that it doesn’t make 
an explicit commitment to QE, but it does set a minimum level of purchases that could be taken 
that way.  The world could evolve in many ways, and I’d prefer to wait to make commitments 
until the path is clearer.  Instead, I would have maintained the previous language focusing on 
levels as needed. 
Looking forward, I like the language the Chair proposed yesterday for our forward 
guidance when we decide it’s time to make it clear.  The key for me was expressed well by 
President Bullard and, earlier today, by President Harker—to pick a state you can achieve.  I 
June 9–10, 2020
184 of 270


 
 
 
believe the Chair’s proposed statement balances well both sides of our mandate without getting 
so numerically specific as to overcommit us to a target we might not achieve. 
The experience over the past 10 years convinces me we can support the economy’s return 
to maximum employment.  Frankly, I’m not as confident that forward guidance will move 
inflation, and the experiences of Europe and Japan don’t reassure me.  And, as I said yesterday 
and President Kaplan just outlined well, overcommitment has costs, including excess leverage, 
reach-for-yield behavior, and market volatility.  So I’d support a formulation like the one you 
described. 
Finally, I’d emphasize that in the current environment, the key is to unfreeze businesses 
from their uncertainty.  Our Main Street facility is targeted explicitly at that need.  And, as 
Presidents Rosengren and Kaplan just said, our highest value now is in those kinds of facilities—
in launching them successfully, messaging their value, and optimizing their terms for appropriate 
uptake—and I look forward to that.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans, please. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Monetary policy is in the right place for now, and 
I support the statement.  Yesterday’s discussion brought many issues into focus for me.  I’d been 
tempted to remain complacent that monetary policy has already done much, and the difficult 
challenges blocking robust economic recovery require fiscal policy and public health safety 
responses.  As you have emphasized, Mr. Chair, fiscal policy is better positioned to directly 
support unemployed households and provide grants and relief for enterprises that were sound in 
January and can be again later this year and in 2021. 
But Neel raised an important point when he asked how much monetary accommodation 
was actually being provided in the form of lower nominal rates versus r*.  For the longest time, 
June 9–10, 2020
185 of 270


 
 
 
the clearest indicator of this to me was in the inflation experience and the path forward.  When 
the FOMC continually underruns our inflation objective, we are too restrictive. 
Now, my complacent attitude coming in was to just say that this is premature to worry 
about low inflation when the level of economic distress is so high and its path forward is also 
unclear.  That may be right.  The 13(3) programs have been important and helpful, but with the 
recent unemployment news and widespread business reopenings, more paths to lower 
unemployment seem likely than I thought at our previous meeting.  
And there are greater second-wave risks, too.  The likelihood of inflation running below 
2 percent for years during a time of strong recovery is an enormous risk for our dual-mandate 
credibility.  This would be despite all of the great and innovative market functioning support that 
the Fed has supplied during this crisis. 
I think we will need to clarify our forward guidance on policy rates by our September 
meeting.  Perhaps initial forays into greater explicitness start off more qualitatively in September 
and are sharpened by October.  We still have much ground to cover before we have an 
agreement—at least it seemed from yesterday’s discussion and this morning’s. 
John Williams pointed out that our current yield curve builds in substantial expectations 
for further asset purchases this year.  I think we will need to keep in mind that the market has 
expectations for further asset purchases with our forward guidance, and our alternative policy 
choices must navigate communicating that in a way that convinces the public that we’re 
committed to a very strong further policy accommodation, perhaps in a different form than they 
expect and different from what we’ve provided before.  But to be successful, I think the answer 
to Neel’s question before too long must be:  “Yes, we are providing bountiful accommodation in 
June 9–10, 2020
186 of 270


 
 
 
order to ensure that we actually overshoot 2 percent inflation sooner rather than later”—which, 
in the previous cycle, was never. 
My “takeaway” from yesterday’s discussion is that we will struggle to agree on the right 
forward-guidance parameters or asset purchases that convey a sense of abundant 
accommodation.  Will we really say we will keep the funds rate at the ELB until inflation gets to 
2 percent?  Maybe we get to 2 percent inflation easily, but our simulations warn it may be 
uncomfortably low, with lower-for-longer rates.  And it’s easy to imagine financial stability 
concerns being raised early.  That was the case in 2013, for sure. 
Will we be willing to call out an unemployment rate publicly that we will also continue 
with until it is achieved?  When I asked Chair Janet Yellen why we couldn’t just extend our 
6.5 percent unemployment threshold to 6 percent back in March 2014, when we were on the 
doorstep of 6.5 percent, she asked me what I would do if we stalled at 6.2 percent—keep the 
funds rate at the lower bound forever?  So the FOMC immediately dropped the threshold 
forward guidance in March 2014 and muddled along on the dimension of not describing how 
long the funds rate would be at zero.  And asset purchases, tapering, and delay became our only 
tools of action. 
Once we start looking at weaker wage growth and high unemployment, we’re going to 
have higher natural rate estimates cloud our longer-term judgment.  That was my “takeaway” 
from the answer to the question I asked yesterday.  And there will be questions of, how low can 
we go?  That will return. 
I could go on, but you get the idea.  There are details we need to figure out. 
Let me end with one more observation of further work we need to do.  As we 
contemplate further asset purchases and the size of our balance sheet increases, we need to face 
June 9–10, 2020
187 of 270


 
 
 
up to the fact that we have different views on the appropriate size of the SOMA balance sheet.  
Or are we all just uncertain of the appropriate size?  Unless we are pretty much indifferent or 
resigned to piling up trillions more in assets if needed to get inflation to 2 percent, our distaste 
for such large QE accommodation will limit all of our monetary effectiveness. 
When we talked about round-tripping the balance sheet previously, we’re including in 
our policy strategy the notion that these boosts to prices will not be permanent.  Taking this to 
their logical conclusion, prices won’t be going up at all if investors expect that, at the end, you’ll 
unwind all of this. 
There is a literature that looks at the additional monetary dimension that comes from 
communicating badly the endpoint of the balance sheet adjustment.  I think of Auerbach and 
Obstfeld in their 2004 paper and their discussions of another reason why the Bank of Japan 
wasn’t providing accommodation even when they thought they were.  I think we need more staff 
work and a Committee discussion on that issue, too. 
So for today, Mr. Chairman, I support the statement, and I say, let’s keep going with our 
policy discussions at our next meetings.  I agree we still need to get to an updated long-run 
framework in which we agree on our inflation objective.  I prefer overshooting, allowing for that, 
and clarifying what we mean by “maximum employment” and “employment shortfalls.”  Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President George, please. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support today’s decision to maintain the 
current stance of policy.  The Federal Reserve has taken numerous actions to support the 
economy and to facilitate access to credit.  With the federal funds rate near zero and other 
emergency policy measures in force, these actions are appropriately aimed at supporting market 
June 9–10, 2020
188 of 270


 
 
 
functioning and providing accommodation to aid in the economy’s recovery consistent with 
our goals. 
At the same time, while I support the statement, the language in paragraph 5 may leave 
too much ambiguity around the rationale for our continued asset purchases.  With market 
functioning having largely returned to pre-pandemic levels, it might be unclear to the public why 
we would plan to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency securities at a monthly 
pace that exceeds the LSAP programs adopted during the financial crisis.  Pending more specific 
guidance on the framework guiding these purchases, the market is likely to set its own 
expectations for what we should be doing and why.  And once market expectations are set, we 
can find ourselves in a position of feeling obligated to ratify those expectations or, at least, not 
disappoint them terribly.  I think we’ll be well served to clarify our position in the coming 
months. 
To date, we’ve explained the purchases as aiding market functioning.  It would be my 
preference to not transition casually into QE4.  If or when we launch an LSAP program to 
provide additional accommodation, I think it would benefit us to have a clear announcement and 
a distinct policy, as others have noted.  Since previous studies have shown that much of the 
benefit of LSAPs has come from an announcement effect, we may risk undermining some of the 
potential benefit of this tool by implementing it in dribs and drabs. 
Finally, continuing large purchases of Treasury securities without a clear framework or 
rationale, coincident with the tremendous increase in issuance by the Treasury, could give rise to 
questions about our independence.  The sooner we tie our purchases back to economic 
conditions, the less it will appear that fiscal deficits are being financed. 
June 9–10, 2020
189 of 270


 
 
 
As the economy’s reopening progresses, we should get more clarity about the effect of 
the actions we’ve taken as well as the effect of fiscal stimulus.  I’m also realistic that the 
extraordinary uncertainty about the path of the pandemic over the second half of the year and the 
economic outlook will require a fair amount of patience and wisdom as we navigate the likely 
long-lasting implications of the virus. 
As lockdowns are lifted with varying levels of ongoing restrictions, I anticipate that labor 
market data and other measures of activity will be difficult to interpret.  After flattening out in 
May, it’s likely that real indicators will show strong growth, particularly in the third quarter, 
even as the level of activity remains depressed.  As we assess our policy in that environment, the 
question is less likely to be whether the economy is headed in the right direction, but rather 
whether we judge that the pace is fast enough or requires an additional nudge from monetary 
policy.  A desire to achieve our objective sooner rather than later will necessarily involve 
judgments about costs and benefits of the alternative policy strategies we discussed yesterday. 
Even before the coronavirus shock, the pace of investment had been disappointing for 
some time.  Trade policy uncertainty was partly, though perhaps not entirely, to blame.  Now, I 
imagine, investment may take another hit as firms adjust to the new elements of uncertainty 
introduced by the virus.  And at the same time that investment is weak, desired savings could 
be high. 
In that context, it will be challenging to judge whether additional monetary policy actions 
can be effective.  As we review our policy options later this year and consider the need for 
additional accommodation, keeping a close eye on inflation expectations as well as the pace and 
nature of this recovery will be key.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman, please. 
June 9–10, 2020
190 of 270


 
 
 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Chair Powell.  I support the statement as currently written.  
The policy actions we’ve taken since March have helped improve the flow of credit to many 
households and businesses.  I’m encouraged by the declining use of many of our emergency 
facilities as financial markets have become functional again. 
The pandemic-related closures of large swaths of our economy, however, along with 
extraordinary social-distancing measures, have taken an extremely heavy toll on employment 
and business and household spending.  While I’m optimistic that we’ll be able to avoid the 
worst-case scenarios discussed in the Tealbook and elsewhere, I continue to see the risks to our 
economy as tilted to the downside, including the risk that recent gains in financial asset prices 
will prove fleeting. 
On the whole, I see our current policy stance as appropriate while we continue to assess 
economic and financial conditions in coming months.  Further, I like the optionality that 
paragraph 5 of the statement provides, and I’m looking forward to our discussions in upcoming 
meetings of other policy actions that we might consider if the economy needs additional support.  
Thank you, Chair Powell. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard, please. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  Activity is in the very early stage of turning around after 
an unprecedented plunge, and considerable uncertainty clouds the path ahead.  So it is 
appropriate to maintain our current posture for a few months before shifting from stabilization to 
support for demand. 
With activity resuming somewhat earlier than anticipated, we should have a better sense 
of the tone of the recovery by our meeting in September.  In addition, we should have vital 
information about some important unknowns.  In particular, the outlook will be influenced by 
June 9–10, 2020
191 of 270


 
 
 
how the Congress addresses critical fiscal decisions, given the July fiscal cliff associated with the 
expiration of the expanded size and eligibility of unemployment benefits and the delayed tax 
filings that will affect state and local financing needs. 
Today the critical objective is to convey a commitment to providing the steady support 
that the economy will require for an extended period.  It will be important to demonstrate that 
while we welcome the news in May’s payroll report that 2.5 million Americans returned to work, 
we do not see that as providing any grounds for changing course in light of the 26 million 
Americans who remain out of work and the 6 million who’ve left the labor force since the 
COVID-19 shock. 
The SEP will help convey that message.  The large majority of respondents expect the 
federal funds rate to remain at its lower bound, with core inflation below our 2 percent objective 
and employment short of its maximum, through the end of the forecast horizon.  And many 
respondents noted they put significant weight on a more adverse scenario possibly associated 
with rolling flare-ups or a second wave of infections. 
For today’s meeting, market participants have high confidence in the Federal Reserve’s 
willingness to act, given our record to date.  This is confirmed in the statement’s reiteration that 
we will use the “full range of tools” to support the economy.  It is vitally important to make our 
13(3) facilities as broadly available as we can in order to avoid the costly insolvencies of 
otherwise viable employers and the associated damage to the economy—a point noted by 
Presidents Rosengren, Kaplan, and Barkin. 
The continuity in the forward-guidance language and on the pace of asset purchases will 
be read as extending our commitment to doing what is necessary while we develop a more 
enduring and comprehensive program of support for the recovery.  The level of purchases should 
June 9–10, 2020
192 of 270


 
 
 
be consistent with expectations coming into the meeting.  The careful change in rationale for 
asset purchases provides appropriate transitional language while preserving optionality to 
introduce a more material change in the context of a comprehensive program. 
By September, we should be far enough along on our long-run strategy review to provide 
the overarching objective that will guide our program of accommodation and the tools to achieve 
it.  Although my own thinking is still evolving, I currently anticipate that a three-pronged 
program is likely to prove most powerful:  flexible average inflation targeting that would imply 
inflation rising moderately above 2 percent for a time to make up for the persistent undershoot; 
minimizing shortfalls, rather than deviations, of employment from its maximum; and 
conditioning forward guidance, front-end yield curve control, and back-end asset purchases on 
the achievement of those goals.  In my view, this approach is vital for re-anchoring inflation 
expectations firmly at 2 percent, as noted by Vice Chair Clarida and Presidents Daly and Evans. 
In the absence of critical, contingent forward commitments, market participants are prone 
to overreact to economic surprises, prompting excessive volatility and premature financial 
tightening, as happened at critical moments in the recovery from the GFC at considerable cost.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles, please. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Chair.  I support the proposed statement as written.  The 
damage to the economy that has been done by the measures taken to respond to the virus is deep.  
Extraordinary times continue to call for extraordinary measures. 
Relatedly, let me reiterate my support for all of the other actions that the Federal Reserve 
has taken to support financial market functioning and the flow of credit.  The 13(3) facilities, as 
well as the temporary regulatory relief that we provided to banks to ensure that they continue to 
June 9–10, 2020
193 of 270


 
 
 
use their capital and liquidity buffers to fund economic activity, are critical aspects of our 
support and necessary complements even as we have monetary policy accommodation turned up 
full throttle. 
I think the continued focus of the draft statement on the role of asset purchases in 
supporting market functioning is appropriate in this highly uncertain environment, in which 
changes in the statement language could be overinterpreted.  Moreover, limiting the guidance to 
state that we’ll maintain the rate of purchases over coming months maintains our flexibility to 
recalibrate forward guidance and asset purchases at a time, I hope, in the near future when 
conditions are not evolving quite so rapidly.  For instance, we have appropriately spent a lot of 
time in the past two days focused on the potential downsides of “W” and “L” scenarios, but last 
Friday’s employment report shocked markets to the upside.  And this reminder that uncertainty 
can resolve in our favor likewise puts in stark relief why a data-dependent policy commitment 
would generally be superior currently to a calendar-based policy. 
The staff presentation on policy tools yesterday laid out the effects of some inflation and 
unemployment thresholds that will help us in calibrating our forward guidance and in sizing an 
LSAP.  I’m looking forward to additional analysis of potential thresholds and purchase amounts, 
and I expect that we’ll be refining the options in that space for the next meeting.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari, please. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support the action in today’s meeting and 
the statement as written.  We have real challenges in achieving both sides of our dual mandate.  
Inflation continues to run low, there’s massive slack in the labor market, and it’s going to be hard 
to close both of those.  Obviously, the first order is getting the health policy right.  There’s great 
June 9–10, 2020
194 of 270


 
 
 
uncertainty, as we’ve discussed, there.  I think we’re playing an important role in stabilizing 
financial markets and ensuring access to credit.  And I support the actions that the System has 
taken over the past few months. 
I am, as I mentioned yesterday, quite concerned about inflation continuing to slip below 
target and inflation expectations becoming unanchored.  And I’m just going to reiterate 
something I said yesterday—that I don’t think we’re providing much accommodation today, 
maybe if any.  I’d love to see staff analysis on that.  Sometimes I think we all just say, “Well, it’s 
highly accommodative monetary policy.”  It’s highly accommodative just because the federal 
funds rate is low relative to history.  I don’t think it’s highly accommodative relative to estimates 
of long-run r* or, certainly, short-run r*.  And I think that’s important that we keep reminding 
ourselves of that, and that’s why I support putting together a package of very strong forward 
guidance, potentially yield curve control, and further asset purchases—all anchored on a state-
based inflation threshold. 
It’s interesting to me—we’ve got this massive unemployment and low inflation, and I 
think we’re already seeing “green shoots of hawkishness” emerging, which are concerns about 
what if we can’t achieve our inflation goal?  If we anchor ourselves to a 2 percent inflation 
threshold, what if we can’t get there?  We’ve already anchored ourselves to a 2 percent inflation 
threshold—we’ve already declared that’s our goal.  So are we going to just give up on that and 
say, “Well, we’re going to miss—we don’t want to try really hard and miss, so we’re not going 
to try and miss”?  I just don’t think that that’s a credible position for us to be in.  I think we 
should be doing whatever we can to actually achieve the inflation goal that we have adopted, and 
we’ve said that this is our true north—that we’re going to go do it.  So let’s go try to do it. 
June 9–10, 2020
195 of 270


 
 
 
And then some comments today about asset prices and financial stability—and I’ve said 
this in previous meetings:  If we can’t achieve our inflation goal of 2 percent, that probably 
means that we’re not providing much accommodation, and that probably means that r* is very 
low.  And someone needs to explain to me the difference between reaching for yield—or how do 
you tell the difference between markets reaching for yield and markets pricing in a low interest 
rate environment for the long term? 
I would argue that the asset prices that we see are a reflection of a low-r* environment, 
and that’s the very reason why we’re struggling so much to actually achieve our inflation target.  
So this is a topic that I would welcome having a very serious deliberation on as a Committee.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester, please. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support maintaining our current policy stance 
today as proposed.  Stay-at-home restrictions are easing, and the economy is moving into a new 
phase.  The second quarter is likely to be the trough, and the economy will begin to recover in 
the second half, but the shape of the recovery will depend on the path of the virus and our ability 
to handle its spread through testing, contact tracing, treatment, and risk-based restrictions; on the 
behavior of households and businesses; and on the effectiveness of policy actions. 
At this point, I think we can continue to watch how the reopening of the economy is 
affecting economic activity, labor markets, and inflation.  My SEP submission is probably the 
closest it’s ever been to the median forecast.  I’m not saying that’s a good or bad thing.  But, as 
we discussed yesterday, there is great uncertainty around our forecast. 
As the shutdown continues and the economy moves into a recovery phase, Federal 
Reserve policy will have to move into a new phase as well.  The Fed’s policy actions so far have 
June 9–10, 2020
196 of 270


 
 
 
been intended to support the smooth functioning of financial markets, thereby supporting the 
flow of credit to households and businesses.  They, along with fiscal policy actions, offered a 
bridge of economic relief during the shutdown to limit more permanent damage.  But even as the 
economy reopens, in my view, it will take quite some time for economic activity and job growth 
to move toward more normal levels. 
I anticipate that we will see a rise in firm failures over the second half of the year and into 
next year even as the overall economy recovers.  Real estate markets could be stressed.  Some 
workers will find it hard to transition into new jobs.  Additional fiscal policy to aid states and 
municipal governments and direct payments to households will be needed to support the 
recovery.  Federal Reserve policy will need to segue from providing relief during the shutdown 
to providing monetary accommodation in support of the recovery and the return to our dual-
mandate goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. 
Our current guidance that interest rates will remain low at the effective lower bound for 
some time has been generally understood by the general public and market participants.  Our 
SEP path will reinforce this guidance, so I don’t see a compelling reason to change the 
statement’s guidance at this meeting.  However, I do anticipate that we will need to clarify the 
guidance later in the year. 
I also anticipate that asset purchases will also need to continue, and that the Committee 
will need to adjust its communications to characterize these purchases as providing 
accommodation rather than more narrowly supporting market functioning.  However, that can 
also wait until we have more information on the shape of the recovery over the next few months, 
more analysis has been done on whether we should add yield curve control to our policy toolkit, 
and we have put together the coherent and consistent package of policy actions we’ll want to 
June 9–10, 2020
197 of 270


 
 
 
take and the strategy for clearly communicating that package to make it most effective.  With the 
culmination of our framework review coming soon, I agree with President Evans that we have a 
real opportunity for aligning our strategy, actions, and communications for maximum effect. 
Regarding today’s statement, I did have some concern about linking the improvement in 
broad financial conditions to policy measures even if we say policy is only part of the reason.  I 
can imagine there might be reversals in financial conditions, particularly equity prices, if it turns 
out that the reopening was premature or news of vaccines was too optimistic.  I wouldn’t want 
the reversal to be attributed to policy action or inaction on our part.  If we want to cite policy, I 
would have preferred to focus more narrowly on the improvement in market functioning and the 
flow of credit to households and businesses rather than broader financial conditions.  However, 
others don’t share that concern, and I can support today’s statement as written. 
One final point.  Yesterday’s discussion of Rochelle Edge’s charts illustrating the optimal 
control exercises brings up something I’ve mentioned at earlier meetings and that others have 
mentioned as well—namely, that the Committee should have a discussion of our loss function.  
Economists use a symmetric quadratic loss function because there are micro foundations for it.  
In DSGE models, a welfare-based loss function is well approximated by the familiar symmetric 
quadratic loss function that penalizes both positive and negative deviations of employment from 
its natural rate and inflation from its target.  So that loss function is an appropriate simplification 
to use within the models to optimally achieve our monetary policy goals. 
But our framework review discussions, including the Fed Listens events, have brought up 
questions about why one would care about undershooting the natural rate of unemployment.  
And yesterday’s discussion centered on why one would care about overshooting inflation by a 
moderate amount.  Questions like this seem part and parcel of the discussion of appropriate goals 
June 9–10, 2020
198 of 270


 
 
 
within our framework discussions.  Changing the goal to say “average inflation” does not 
necessarily mean changing the loss function.  Treating undershoots of the unemployment rate 
differently from overshoots may be one way to think about incorporating mismeasurement of the 
natural rate.   
I think that there are a lot of issues to think about here, and I’d welcome a discussion 
about the underpinnings of the quadratic loss function, a review of the literature that uses 
alternative loss functions, and how our policy decisions and model parameters might change 
should we adopt an alternative loss function.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams, please. 
VICE CHAIR WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support the statement as written.  
I’d also like to thank President Kashkari for emphasizing the importance of r*.  That leaves me 
free to talk about other things today. 
But your point—although I’m not a fan of short-run r*, in thinking about whether policy 
is accommodative, I think that’s really model dependent.  The bigger point is that a very low r*, 
long-run r*, which is shown in surveys and is shown in market pricing, does mean that, even 
with a zero interest rate, our monetary policy is not as accommodative as you might think based 
on historical levels of interest rates.  So I think that’s a really important point to keep in mind 
when we think about how accommodative policy is. 
Now, we’re dealing with a highly uncertain situation.  Honestly, it’s fortunate that we’re 
not trying to put together a definitive package of monetary policy actions today when the future 
is so unclear.  Rather, we should take some time to get the diagnosis right and the treatment plan 
in order. 
June 9–10, 2020
199 of 270


 
 
 
And I’m glad that we’ll be able to bring the framework review to closure this year and, I 
hope, soon.  The new framework will be critical to our policy actions and communications as we 
strive to bring the economy back to maximum employment and inflation averaging 2 percent. 
The economic outlook is largely dependent on the path of the pandemic, with much of the 
country—in fact, much of the globe—still under significant social-distancing measures.  Under 
these conditions, our actions so far are appropriately focused on stabilizing the financial system 
and supporting the flow of credit.  Massive asset purchases and the timely design and 
implementation of liquidity facilities have helped unclog bottlenecks in credit supply and restore 
market functioning.  This has contributed to dispelling some of the tail risks and restoring order 
to financial markets.  In line with the FOMC statement, we will continue to do our job with both 
confidence in our tools and humility about the scale of the disruption that we’re seeing. 
And it’s worth repeating that a full recovery will be measured in years, not months or 
quarters, and the risks are overwhelmingly to the downside.  I was struck by yesterday’s 
discussion, in which I felt—or at least I heard similar comments from everyone around the table.  
This is why it will be important in coming meetings to move beyond the short-run considerations 
and focus—lock, stock, and barrel—on how to best use our full arsenal of monetary policy tools 
to shepherd the economy to maximum employment and 2 percent inflation once the health crisis 
subsides. 
Now, this will be a long road, and we’ll need to set out with perseverance and clarity of 
purpose.  As we embark on this journey, we’ll need to make clear that our monetary policy 
actions and communications are not expressed or viewed as emergency or extraordinary 
measures but are part of our overall longer-run strategy to achieve our dual-mandate goals. 
June 9–10, 2020
200 of 270


 
 
 
Right now, market expectations may not be too far from our own, but the market 
response to the labor report, with two- and three-year yields moving up, demonstrates the risk 
that, as the economy improves, markets may prematurely expect a tightening of policy, to the 
detriment of the economic recovery.  This was a significant problem in the early stages of the 
previous recovery, when market participants expected that we’d be raising rates in a year or so 
despite very high unemployment.  The use of strong forward guidance addressed that problem 
then, and in the current episode, our words and actions will be vital to maintaining financial 
conditions supportive of a strong recovery and 2 percent inflation. 
When I look at the SEP—with an unemployment rate currently at 13.3 percent; a median 
unemployment rate at 9.3 percent at the end of the year, 6.5 percent next year, and 5.5 percent 
the year after; and inflation underrunning our target each consecutive year—I mean, it is hard for 
me to think about how monetary policy could be doing too much in this circumstance.  I think 
the risks are really that we won’t be able to do as much as we would like to do, given the lower 
bound and given the limitations on the ability of monetary policy alone to stimulate the 
economy. 
I agree with my colleagues that it’s a whole package of policy measures.  Whether it’s 
monetary policy, the 13(3) facilities, fiscal policy, or health policies; all of these have to work 
together for us to see the economic recovery that we want to see.  But I do think it’s important 
that we do everything we can with our tools that we have, as we promised, to support a strong 
economy returning to maximum employment and inflation averaging 2 percent.  I think that’s 
our primary challenge and the one that we should be focused on.  
And the last thing—I’ll just pick up on a theme yesterday that I heard, and this is not a 
criticism of the staff at all.  I mean, they’re trying to deal with the fact that we have enormous 
June 9–10, 2020
201 of 270


 
 
 
disruptions to the economy in the current quarter and next few quarters.  I do feel that using the 
term “natural rate of unemployment” to describe what’s happening in that period as a significant 
rise in the natural rate is not helpful for our discussions.  For all of us who went through this for 
the past 10 years, conflating maybe short-run factors that affect the labor market with longer-run 
kinds of disruptions to the labor market became a problem, in which a number of people started 
thinking, “Well, unemployment is high, so therefore it must be the natural rate of unemployment 
that’s high.” 
So, again, this is not about how the staff is approaching it.  I think they’re approaching it 
very thoughtfully and carefully and in a sensible way.  I just think that we need to watch our own 
use of the terminology.  When we say “natural rate of unemployment,” it’s more helpful to think 
about that as a longer-run or sustained shift in the underlying fundamentals of the labor market. 
And here I just would agree completely with President Daly and how she talked about 
that.  We did a lot of research on the issues of the structure of the labor market, Beveridge 
curves, mismatch, and all of those issues.  And what we found from the previous recession is 
that, as long as we can restore a strong labor market and as long as we can restore jobs, the 
natural rate of unemployment doesn’t need to be higher.  In fact, as we saw, we were able to 
bring the unemployment rate down to 3.5 percent—very inclusive growth in jobs and higher 
wage growth.  We were able to do that even though, at the time, we’d had the worst recession of 
our lives. 
So I just would caution all of us to remind ourselves where we were back in January and 
February.  It does seem like a long time ago.  But we were in an economy that was growing over 
2 percent and had an unemployment rate of 3.5 percent.  I know inflation didn’t get to our target, 
but we were pretty close.  We can get back to that.  We’ve proven we were able to do it last time.  
June 9–10, 2020
202 of 270


 
 
 
We can do it again and, I think, just keep that memory—it wasn’t that long ago—that our 
economy can be in that place and that we can get there.  That’s just my “takeaway” from much 
of the discussion today.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks to all for your comments.  I’ll just mention a 
couple of things.  First, as I think I’ve said to most of you, if not all of you, I do intend to return 
to the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy imminently, with the idea 
toward finalizing that.  That’s the first thing. 
The second thing is, I also do think this next meeting is likely the one at which we should 
return to the traditional A-B-C structure of the policy statement.  So I think it’s very likely that 
we’ll do that, because we will be, I think, starting to think seriously in seven weeks about exactly 
what the possible ways to clarify our forward guidance and the purpose of our asset purchases, 
et cetera, will be.  I do think the time is coming for that.  I think a number of you have said that.  
I think that’ll be in the minutes, and therefore I may—something like that may come out today at 
the press conference. 
In any case, thank you again.  And with that, let me now ask Jim Clouse to make clear 
what the FOMC will vote on and to read the roll.  Following the FOMC vote, the Board will vote 
on the interest rates on reserves, discount rates, and other matters.  Jim? 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  The vote will be on the monetary policy 
statement and directive to the Desk as they appear on pages 3 through 5 of Rochelle’s briefing 
materials.  And I’ll call the roll. 
Chair Powell 
Yes 
Vice Chair Williams 
Yes 
Governor Bowman 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
Governor Clarida 
Yes 
President Harker 
Yes 
June 9–10, 2020
203 of 270


 
 
 
President Kaplan 
Yes 
President Kashkari 
Yes 
President Mester 
Yes 
Governor Quarles 
Yes 
 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Okay.  Now we have two sets of related matters under the Board’s 
jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  May I have a motion 
from a Board member to take the proposed actions with respect to the interest rates on reserves 
as set forth in the implementation note included in Rochelle’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Next up, we need to approve the 
corresponding actions for discount rates.  May I have a motion from a Board member to approve 
establishment of the primary credit rate at 0.25 percent and establishment of the rates for 
secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas specified in the staff’s June 5, 2020, 
memo to the Board? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIR POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIR POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Our final agenda item is to confirm 
that our next meeting will be on Tuesday and Wednesday, July 28 and 29.  And that concludes 
this meeting.  Thanks very much, everyone.  Be well, be safe, and I look forward to speaking 
with you and ultimately seeing you soon.  Take care.  Thanks. 
END OF MEETING 
June 9–10, 2020
204 of 270
