SOURCE: FOMC20181219meeting.pdf
DATE: 20181219
TYPE: meeting
============================================================

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
December 18–19, 2018 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held 
in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on 
Tuesday, December 18, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, December 19, 2018, at 
9:00 a.m. 
PRESENT: 
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman 
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman 
Thomas I. Barkin 
Raphael W. Bostic 
Michelle W. Bowman 
Lael Brainard 
Richard H. Clarida 
Mary C. Daly 
Loretta J. Mester 
Randal K. Quarles 
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively 
James A. Clouse, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel 
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel 
Steven B. Kamin, Economist 
Thomas Laubach, Economist 
David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, 
William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
December 18–19, 2018
1 of 242


 
 
 
Matthew J. Eichner,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, 
Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, 
Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of 
Governors 
 
Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors 
 
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers 
to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Shaghil Ahmed and Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Directors, Division of 
International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach,2 Senior 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Marnie Gillis DeBoer,2 David López-Salido, and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  
 
Steven A. Sharpe, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,1 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank 
Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors 
 
Andrew Figura and John Sabelhaus, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust,3 Laura Lipscomb,2 and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Assistant 
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Don Kim, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
 
1 Attended through the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations. 
2 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks. 
3 Attended the discussion of financial developments and open market operations through the close of the meeting. 
4 Attended Tuesday session only. 
December 18–19, 2018
2 of 242


 
 
 
 
Michele Cavallo,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Mark A. Carlson,1 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors 
 
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Andrea Ajello and Alyssa G. Anderson,2 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Arsenios Skaperdas,2 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Donielle A. Winford, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
 
Michael Dotsey, Sylvain Leduc, Daniel G. Sullivan, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. 
Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, San Francisco, 
Chicago, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 
 
Todd E. Clark, Evan F. Koenig, Antoine Martin, and Julie Ann Remache,2 Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, New York, and New York, 
respectively 
 
Roc Armenter,2 Kathryn B. Chen,2 Jonathan L. Willis, and Patricia Zobel,2 Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas City, and New York, respectively 
 
Gara Afonso2 and William E. Riordan,2 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York.  
 
Suraj Prasanna2 and Lisa Stowe,2 Markets Officers, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
 
Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,1 Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago 
 
Fabrizio Perri, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
 
December 18–19, 2018
3 of 242


 
 
 
Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
December 18–19, 2018 
 
December 18 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome.  As usual, today’s 
meeting will be conducted as a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Board.  I’ll need a motion 
from a Board member to close the meeting. 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  We’ve enjoyed having 
Governor Bowman here with us at the Board the past several weeks, and, today, I’d like to 
welcome her to her first official FOMC meeting.  Miki brings with her broad experience in 
government as well as deep experience in banking, both as an executive of a community bank 
and as state banking commissioner.  Miki, we look forward to benefiting from your perspectives 
on a wide range of issues.  So join me in welcoming Miki, please.  [Applause] 
I’d like to also mention that this will be David Wilcox’s final FOMC meeting before he 
retires early next year.  Big news.  And I’ll have some congratulatory remarks for him at the end 
of the meeting, depending on how the meeting goes.  [Laughter] 
So let us now turn to our formal agenda.  We’ll begin with the long-run framework topic 
and with the staff briefings, which will be presented by Patricia Zobel, Mark Carlson, Kathryn 
Chen, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl.  Patricia, would you like to begin? 
MS. ZOBEL.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In November, Committee participants 
expressed a desire to transition to an operating regime that has a lower overall level of 
reserves.  We have four presentations today that discuss considerations for the 
 
1 The materials used by Ms. Zobel, Mr. Carlson, Ms. Chen, and Mr. Schulhofer-Wohl are appended to this transcript 
(appendix 1). 
December 18–19, 2018
4 of 242


 
 
 
transition to lower reserves as well as the ultimate size and composition of the 
balance sheet.  I will discuss how money markets might evolve, Mark will talk about 
approaches to interest rate control, Kathryn will discuss the long-run portfolio 
composition, and Sam will review potential ways to reduce the balance sheet and 
provide some key “takeaways.” 
For most of the past decade, money market rates have traded at a spread below 
IOER, as shown in figure 1 on exhibit 1 in your handout.  This reflected a 
superabundance of reserves in the system.  More recently, amid increases in Treasury 
debt issuance and ongoing declines in levels of reserve balances, money market rates 
have risen gradually relative to IOER, and most are now near or above IOER.  As a 
result, a main form of overnight activity in recent years—banks taking deposits to 
hold reserves and earn IOER—has waned, and other money market dynamics have 
also started to shift. 
As the level of reserves continues to decline, the federal funds rate is expected, at 
some point, to rise persistently above IOER.  This may reflect more competitive 
deposit markets or some banks seeking short-term funding.  It may also reflect 
continued high Treasury debt issuance or the LCR benefit of borrowing from Federal 
Home Loan Banks.  However, if rates stay well connected to IOER, this will continue 
to be a system of abundant excess reserves, with IOER being the primary influence 
on money market rates.  In some ways, it may be more like the floor that was 
expected when payment of interest on reserves was initiated in 2008. 
We don’t have perfect foresight on how money market rates will behave above 
IOER.  There is a good chance that rates will rise very gradually.  The FHLB 
system—which has broad reach across the banking system—will serve as an 
immediate source of funding for banks and can alleviate pressures in unsecured 
funding markets.  In addition, the fact that banks with abundant reserves can lend in 
repo markets should help keep secured rates close to unsecured rates. 
There is some risk, however, of increased rate volatility, even as reserves remain 
relatively abundant in aggregate.  Most banks have not had to manage payment flows 
closely for many years, and some have meaningful changes to make in their business 
practices.  In some circumstances, the FHLB system’s capacity to accommodate 
funding needs may be insufficient, particularly for late-day payment shocks.  And 
traditional bank lenders may require higher spreads than they did pre-crisis to 
redistribute reserves.  These types of funding market pressures may abate, as market 
participants find more permanent funding sources. 
At some point, higher or more volatile money market rates will indicate a 
steepening of the reserve demand curve.  Distinguishing transitory pressures from 
permanent pressures related to an aggregate reserve need will be both a “science” and 
an “art,” and we expect that there will be considerable learning during this process.  
The staff has detailed data and relationships across markets that should provide 
insight on conditions.  I will briefly describe two areas of monitoring and outreach. 
December 18–19, 2018
5 of 242


 
 
 
First, the staff is broadly monitoring unsecured and secured markets for any signs 
of reserves scarcity.  For example, as shown in figure 2, we haven’t yet seen a 
meaningful relationship between daily changes in reserve levels and changes in the 
federal funds rate.  But if this arises—particularly on days when there are large 
changes in reserve supply—it may be one early indicator of emerging scarcity.  
Separately, in secured markets, we understand that banks with excess reserves are 
investing in repo when the spreads are attractive.  Signs that banks are less willing to 
take advantage of these opportunities may suggest that reserves are less abundant. 
Outreach and surveys also help the staff better understand banks’ reserve 
positions and their reserve management strategies.  Figure 3 shows, with the triangles, 
each bank’s ratio of its lowest comfortable reserve level, as reported in the September 
Senior Financial Officer Survey, to its most recent 60-day median balance.  As 
depicted, there is wide variation in how close banks are to their minimum levels.  
Some banks have already adapted their business models to hold fewer reserves and 
closely monitor flows, while others hold sizable reserve buffers that absorb payment 
shocks.  In aggregate, banks have substantial reserve buffers.  The minimums they 
reported will likely continue to evolve, and the staff will update these figures through 
outreach and additional surveys. 
As shown in figure 4, aggregate reserve balances are projected to decline at an 
average pace of about $45 billion a month and reach $1 trillion in the second quarter 
of 2020.  This is the staff’s current rough estimate of the lowest level of reserves 
consistent with an abundant-reserves regime.  There is considerable uncertainty 
associated with this level, though, and the steeper part of the reserve demand curve 
could be encountered earlier or later than that date. 
There are several actions that the Committee could consider to help smooth the 
path to lower levels of reserves.  Open market operations can be an effective tool to 
moderate large swings in reserve supply during periods when portfolio redemptions 
or changes in autonomous factors are particularly sizable.  In this case, the overall 
pace of the decline would be maintained, but the smoothing out of daily changes 
could enhance interest rate control.  In addition, as signs of scarcity are detected, the 
Committee could consider using open market operations to provide reserves while 
continuing to redeem longer-term assets at the current pace.  This combination would 
be effectively slowing the pace of decline in reserves. 
The Committee may also consider reducing the pace of portfolio redemptions or 
ceasing them altogether.  This would most directly slow the pace of decline in 
reserves but may have some communication costs, as altering the speed of 
redemptions could be perceived as signaling a change in the stance of policy.  Mark 
will now describe approaches that the Committee might take to control interest rates 
during the transition. 
MR. CARLSON.  Thank you, Patricia.  I will refer to exhibit 2, which describes 
some options for mitigating potential risks to effective interest rate control that might 
be needed during the transition to a long-run operating regime.  The options listed are 
December 18–19, 2018
6 of 242


 
 
 
presented such that the amount of action required by the Federal Reserve increases as 
one goes down the page. 
For the past year, the balance sheet has been running off in accordance with the 
plans the Committee announced in mid-2017.  This gradual and predictable decline 
helps market participants form expectations of the future supply of reserves and 
should encourage them to plan how they will manage their liquidity and should also 
support market functioning.  If money markets adjust smoothly to lower reserve 
levels, then the Committee may not need to take additional steps to maintain a high 
degree of control over interest rates during the transition period. 
If upward pressures on money market rates do materialize—owing to market 
frictions, transitory funding needs, inefficient distribution of reserves, or as the steep 
part of the demand curve is reached—there are existing tools that could help manage 
the risks to effective rate control.  I will briefly discuss some of these tools. 
The first is to continue to make technical adjustments to IOER.  Doing so will 
provide more space for the policy rate to exceed IOER without moving out of the 
target range.  Rates above IOER could also provide greater incentives for banks to 
adjust their operations and to economize on reserve holdings.  However, there is 
limited space in which to reduce IOER further within the current range without 
considering other adjustments to the framework.  In particular, there is a possibility 
that making the spread between IOER and the ON RRP rate too narrow could lead to 
higher take-up at the ON RRP at the expense of private money markets.  There would 
be additional room to reduce IOER if the ON RRP rate were lowered below the 
bottom of the range.  However, communications about such adjustments to the 
framework could be difficult because of the perception of the ON RRP rate as a hard 
floor. 
Primary credit can help deal with funding market pressures, especially those 
related to market frictions and distributional issues.  However, the current rate—set 
50 basis points above the top of the target range—may be too high to limit upward 
pressure on rates.  In addition, stigma associated with borrowing at the window—
which partly reflects concerns about the signal associated with borrowing at a rate 
well above typical market rates—may further limit the ability of primary credit to 
curb upward pressure on rates. 
If those adjustments are not sufficient, then there are some additional measures 
available to the Committee.  First, the width of the target range could be widened.  
That could signal that the Committee is willing to tolerate some volatility without 
changing the stance of policy and also provides space in which to use other tools—for 
instance, the Committee could lower the bottom of the range, reduce the ON RRP rate 
to the new bottom of the range, and have more space to make adjustments to IOER—
but widening the range may make communications about the stance of policy more 
difficult. 
December 18–19, 2018
7 of 242


 
 
 
As discussed by Patricia, the Committee could also smooth or slow the pace at 
which it is shrinking reserves once it begins to see signs of upward pressure on rates. 
Fixed-quantity open market operations could be used as a way of temporarily 
adding reserves.  Such operations could be used to smooth the effect of declining 
reserves, to respond to predictable exogenous pressures—such as heightened 
Treasury bill issuance—or to add some reserves back when there are signs that the 
steep part of the demand curve may have been reached.  However, some temporary 
pressures could be difficult to predict, and calibrating discretionary operations to 
offset these pressures could be challenging.  In addition, such operations might not be 
effective if reserves provided through open market operations did not land at the 
banks that need them, and it is not clear how efficiently they would be redistributed.  
For instance, it might take some time for banks to rebuild their interbank lending 
relationships. 
If the Committee were concerned that these incremental measures might not 
mitigate the risks to effective interest rate control, it could consider new approaches 
that would provide a firmer ceiling on rates.  Such approaches would be of a fixed-
rate full-allotment nature.  In that case, one key question would be the position of the 
ceiling operation rate.  The rate could be set at the top of the target range.  This would 
help keep interest rates within the range; but if the ceiling rate were set too close to 
IOER, then that might result in the Federal Reserve providing a relatively large 
amount of funding on an ongoing basis.  Alternatively, the rate could be set well 
above IOER.  This would leave more room for rates to rise above IOER, perhaps 
providing greater incentives for market participants to adjust to the longer-run regime, 
but increases the possibility of volatility in funding markets. 
Ceiling operations could be conducted using the Federal Reserve’s open market 
operation authority, its discount window authority, or both (by offering two parallel 
operations).  A ceiling tool under open market operation authority could involve 
fixed-rate full-allotment repo operations, with the primary dealers using OMO-
eligible collateral.  It would be relatively straightforward to communicate the message 
that such a tool is for monetary policy purposes, and such a tool is less likely to be 
affected by stigma.  But, as with traditional fixed-quantity open market operations, 
this may not be fully effective if the rate pressures are related to distributional issues 
at banks.  It would be helpful to expand the set of counterparties to include banks.  
This would help reduce distributional problems and increase the effectiveness of the 
ceiling tool.  But it is likely to require significant lead time to establish a broad set of 
bank counterparties, and operational constraints would likely limit repo counterparties 
to larger banks. 
Discount window authority could also be used to help establish a ceiling or to 
limit upward pressures on rates.  In this case, transactions would be directly with 
banks; this would facilitate liquidity distribution.  A discount window ceiling could 
be established by simply lowering the primary credit rate.  However, the primary 
credit facility suffers from a stigma problem, especially among larger banks.  It is 
possible that the stigma issue might be partly mitigated by establishing a new lending 
December 18–19, 2018
8 of 242


 
 
 
program labeled as being related to the transition period and featuring a lower lending 
rate but that in other respects closely resembles primary credit.  The new program 
could be further distinguished from primary credit by limiting the number of draws 
over a particular time interval.  Another option for distinguishing a new program from 
primary credit would be to limit acceptable collateral to high-quality assets, such as 
OMO-eligible collateral.  This would help communicate the fact that any lending is 
for monetary policy purposes; however, most OMO-eligible collateral is pledged by 
large banks, so smaller banks might have limited ability to access this program.  
Kathryn will now discuss options for the composition of asset holdings. 
MS. CHEN.  Thank you, Mark.  The SOMA domestic portfolio has declined 
almost $350 billion since October 2017 and is anticipated to decline further to its 
long-run size within the next few years.  Today, agency MBS represent a large share 
of portfolio holdings, and the overall portfolio is much more heavily weighted toward 
longer-dated Treasury securities, including those with 10 to 30 years to maturity, than 
it was in the past.  Therefore, you may wish to consider options regarding long-run 
asset composition and portfolio management, as well as how these choices might be 
communicated to the public to support a smooth transition.  I’ll discuss options 
related to sales of MBS and the maturity composition of the Treasury securities 
portfolio in turn. 
When the size of the portfolio has normalized, MBS are expected to make up 
about 40 percent of the asset holdings.  After the transition to a system with lower 
reserve levels, you may wish to consider whether you prefer to more quickly return to 
a “primarily Treasuries” portfolio by gradually selling MBS in addition to allowing 
MBS paydowns, or whether you are comfortable with letting the MBS holdings 
passively run off over an extended period through only principal payments.  For 
example, a modest program of MBS sales that begins after the normalization of the 
size of the portfolio and that reduces the portfolio $20 billion per month through sales 
and paydowns could extinguish the portfolio within about six years.  Without sales, it 
is likely that MBS will remain a substantial portion of the portfolio for some time, as 
shown in panel 1 of exhibit 3.  The Policy Normalization Principles and Plans stated 
that “the Committee does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as 
part of the normalization process” but noted the possibility of sales of residual MBS 
holdings. 
Even if you prefer to reduce MBS holdings more quickly by incorporating a 
program of modest MBS sales, you may still want to hold some small amount of 
MBS in the long run.  Holding a small MBS portfolio would help maintain 
operational readiness should MBS purchases be desired in the future. 
With regard to the Treasury securities portfolio, as shown in panel 2, the average 
maturity of the portfolio lengthened over the past decade—a direct consequence of 
the large-scale purchases of longer-term securities and the maturity extension 
program conducted in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis.  Once the supply of 
reserves reaches the point of normalization, the Desk will need to begin to purchase 
Treasuries to keep pace with balance sheet growth and to reinvest proceeds received 
December 18–19, 2018
9 of 242


 
 
 
from MBS paydowns and maturing Treasury securities.  As we approach this point, 
you may want to consider objectives for the long-run portfolio as well as approaches 
the Desk should use to reach the desired composition.  This would allow the staff to 
formulate more detailed strategies regarding how to manage the portfolio in line with 
these objectives; additionally, you may want to communicate a strategy to the market 
in advance. 
I’ll discuss two objectives that you might want to emphasize:  neutrality and 
flexibility.  Different weightings of these objectives would result in different portfolio 
compositions.  You may choose simply to hold a portfolio that broadly reflects the 
outstanding maturity structure in the Treasury securities market.  You might prefer 
this composition if you want to prioritize the objective of market neutrality—in other 
words, not having a disproportionate effect on any segment of the Treasury yield 
curve.  Under the current composition of Treasury securities outstanding, this 
portfolio would have approximately six years to maturity overall and about 15 percent 
held in Treasury bills.  Or you may prefer to hold a greater proportion of short-dated 
securities.  This would be consistent with greater weight on the flexibility objective.  
Pre-crisis, prioritization of this objective led to a portfolio more heavily weighted 
toward short-dated securities than the overall market, as is also illustrated by Figure 
2.  The motivation then was the desire to be able to quickly contract the portfolio 
without sales in order to offset a potential large provision of liquidity through the 
discount window.  As you go forward, the rationale for a relatively short-dated 
portfolio in an abundant-reserves regime may be the desire to have significant 
holdings of securities that could easily be sold or allowed to mature as part of a 
maturity extension program, or MEP. 
A key decision, then, would be to determine how many bills are needed to satisfy 
this objective and what the potential considerations are for a portfolio that is more 
heavily weighted toward bills.  For example, staff projections suggest that a portfolio 
with a maturity distribution that roughly matches that of the Treasury securities 
market would allow for an MEP similar in size relative to GDP as the one conducted 
in 2011 and 2012; the “flexibility” scenario described in the memo provides the 
ammunition to conduct a larger MEP. 
On the other hand, holding a portfolio weighted toward short-dated securities 
could lower Federal Reserve net income.  Also, if the Federal Reserve chose to hold a 
large share of its portfolio in the form of bills, there could be an effect on bill yields, 
and the Treasury may then need to make adjustments to its debt management 
practices. 
The operations to realign the composition of the portfolio to the long-run target 
allocation could be done in a “passive” or “active” manner.  These polar approaches 
imply different timelines for achieving the desired composition.  The passive 
approach, involving the long-standing method of reinvesting maturing holdings at 
auction, constrains the ability to achieve, quickly, desired allocations—that is, 
because reinvestment purchases would be driven to a large extent by how SOMA 
maturities line up with issuance of new securities.  On the other hand, an active 
December 18–19, 2018
10 of 242


 
 
 
approach, in which all reinvestments are conducted in the secondary market, would 
provide greater ability to select which maturities on which to concentrate purchases 
and in what proportions—and therefore would achieve a desired composition more 
quickly.  Other options in between these approaches are also possible, including 
altering the current proportional rollover method to be weighted toward short-dated 
securities.  Of course, many of these decisions could interact with the Treasury’s debt 
management decisions and have broader market effects.  Should policymakers wish, 
the staff could return with more detailed discussion of approaches that span from less 
to more active.  Sam will now discuss considerations related to the overall size of the 
balance sheet. 
MR. SCHULHOFER-WOHL.  Thank you, Kathryn.  The preceding presentations 
described how you might transition to a long-run operating regime and asset 
portfolio.  I’ll now turn to steps you could take if remaining in a regime of abundant 
excess reserves appears initially to require keeping the balance sheet larger than you 
would like. 
Since the end of the financial crisis, the size of the balance sheet has been 
determined in large part by decisions about asset purchases for economic stimulus.  In 
the long run, as asset holdings unwind, factors affecting the size of liabilities will 
become more important determinants of the total balance sheet.  The upper panel of 
your fourth exhibit breaks down the Federal Reserve’s liabilities.  I’ll touch on the 
most significant ones. 
Reserves are currently the largest liability item, about $1.8 trillion.  Reserve 
balances allow banks to absorb payment flows without borrowing funds or selling 
assets.  Banks say they want to hold notably higher reserve balances than pre-crisis 
because of decreases in their risk appetite, new approaches to liquidity management, 
and the payment of interest on reserves.  However, in the aggregate, banks say they 
would be comfortable holding substantially lower balances than at present even if 
market interest rates remained near the rate on excess reserves. 
Federal Reserve notes in circulation have roughly doubled since the crisis, to 
about $1.7 trillion.  U.S. currency is an important store of value and medium of 
exchange, both domestically and abroad.  With the supply of reserves falling and 
currency in circulation continuing to grow, Federal Reserve notes will soon resume 
their historical position as the largest liability item. 
The Treasury General Account and liabilities to foreign official institutions have 
also grown, as both the Treasury and foreign central banks have sought to increase 
their liquidity buffers. 
If Federal Reserve policymakers wanted to reduce total liabilities—and I’ll note 
that some liabilities are under the purview of the FOMC, while others would require 
action by other governance bodies or other agencies entirely—there are three broad 
avenues you could pursue.  You could try to reduce banks’ demand for reserves.  You 
could try to operate closer to the steep portion of the reserve demand curve.  Or you 
December 18–19, 2018
11 of 242


 
 
 
could try to reduce nonreserve liabilities.  In a recent memo, we cataloged many 
possible steps along these lines, and we would be prepared to carry out more 
complete analysis of any options that you find of particular interest. 
That said, each of the Federal Reserve’s liabilities plays an important role as a 
safe and liquid asset for the public, banks, the government, or other institutions.  If 
you considered reducing any of the liabilities, you would need to weigh the social 
benefit of that liability against the perceived cost of the additional balance sheet 
required.  Also, most of the available approaches would reduce the size of the balance 
sheet only in the long run, and some could be challenging to implement. 
Another avenue would involve placing the size of the balance sheet in better 
context for the public.  One way to do so would be to emphasize in your 
communications the balance sheet’s size relative to GDP rather than in nominal 
dollars.  The lower panel of your fourth exhibit provides some international context.  
Our balance sheet is about 20 percent of GDP.  This is smaller, relative to GDP, than 
the balance sheets of other reserve-currency central banks currently operating in a 
system of abundant bank reserves, such as the European Central Bank, the Bank of 
Japan, and the Bank of England.  Of course, the Federal Reserve is much further 
along than these central banks in the process of normalizing its monetary policy after 
the crisis. 
We might learn a bit about what’s possible in the long run in an abundant-excess-
reserves regime by looking at the central banks of Norway and New Zealand.  Both 
aim to operate at a relatively low level of abundant reserves, both have much less 
currency in circulation than we do relative to the size of their economies, and both 
have balance sheets that are modestly smaller than ours relative to GDP.  By way of 
contrast, our balance sheet is more than twice as big relative to GDP as those of the 
Bank of Canada and the Reserve Bank of Australia, which operate systems of limited 
excess reserves.  Let me stress, though, that any international comparison of central 
bank balance sheets is only suggestive at best because of the large differences in 
financial systems around the world. 
You might also emphasize in your communications the portions of the balance 
sheet that are under the direct control of monetary policy—in particular, the supply of 
reserves and reserve-like liabilities such as ON RRP balances.  You could de-
emphasize the total size, which also depends importantly on currency growth and the 
Treasury’s decisions about the size of its General Account—both of which have much 
less to do with monetary policy. 
Let me conclude by summarizing the policy tradeoffs that our briefings today 
have raised.  The broadest tradeoff is between the costs of a large balance sheet and 
the benefits of providing reserves or other liabilities.  I just discussed that tradeoff in 
terms of the long-run balance sheet, but it also exists during the transition.  After all, 
if you were indifferent to the size of the balance sheet, you could simply stop the 
reduction in reserve supply now and greatly limit the risk of rate volatility.  If you 
want instead to explore the lowest level of reserves necessary for efficient and 
December 18–19, 2018
12 of 242


 
 
 
effective policy implementation, there are several important considerations.  First, 
what is your tolerance for volatility or upward pressures in the policy rate?  Second, 
strategies are available that could provide some insurance against those pressures, 
including smoothing or slowing the pace of decline in reserves, adjusting the target 
range, and conducting various operations.  Do you see the benefits of that insurance 
as worth the costs of providing it?  Third, as you approach the steeper part of the 
demand curve, how do you weigh the costs of insuring against turbulence against the 
costs of steps to reduce reserve demand or limit other liabilities, or just bearing any 
costs that may come with a large balance sheet?  Lastly, you could also consider 
whether your choices about asset composition might have some of the same benefits, 
in terms of policy space, as operating with a smaller balance sheet. 
That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be happy to take questions and 
would welcome your thoughts on topics that would be worthwhile to pursue further. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks very much.  So now, any questions of the staff before 
we move on to the opportunity to comment? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Just one question on that last point.  When you think of the United 
States as being a reserve currency, I wonder whether the comparison with small countries abroad 
is quite as relevant.  And I wonder if breaking down the liabilities between those domestically-
held and foreign-held—if foreign countries or foreign individuals want to make interest-free 
loans to the United States, that doesn’t seem like something that we should be discouraging; we 
should encourage as much interest-free lending as they want to provide.  [Laughter]  So I think 
there are some aspects of this that, if we’re thinking about communications, we could 
communicate a little bit more about. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Further questions for the staff?  [No response]  
Okay.  Seeing none, let’s move to the opportunity to comment on the long-run framework 
memos and related issues, and we’ll begin with President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  And thanks to the staff—all the staff working on 
these memos on the long-run framework.  It was really another excellent analysis. 
December 18–19, 2018
13 of 242


 
 
 
Now, as we approach the final leg of normalization, we face a lot of uncertainty 
surrounding the demand for reserves, as has been mentioned, and also market functioning and, 
ultimately, as has been discussed, interest rate control. 
Some time ago, I said publicly that we would make the balance sheet normalization as 
boring as “watching paint dry.”  Well, it looks like it’s a little more interesting than that right 
now.  We may not be able to resolve all the uncertainty ahead of time, but I think what we can do 
is to insulate the asset side of the balance sheet from some of the uncertainty stemming from the 
liability side.  We could stop redemptions at a prudent level of reserves—somewhere in the 
upper range of the estimates for the minimum required for a floor system.  We would then keep 
total assets constant via reinvestments, letting reserves slowly decline with currency growth.  
When we assess that reserves are at their desired level, we then reinitiate asset purchases.  This 
plan would effectively decouple the normalization of the size of the balance sheet from the 
normalization of the supply of reserves and, thus, remove a lot of uncertainty regarding the 
future path of our asset holdings. 
Proceeding in this fairly prudent manner would ultimately allow us to better ascertain the 
minimum quantity of reserves necessary for conducting monetary policy effectively and 
efficiently.  The slower pace in the decline of reserves will assist the staff’s monitoring efforts 
and decrease some of the risk associated with uncertainty, like an abrupt or premature end to the 
normalization.  It would also buy us some time to develop initiatives to curb the demand for 
reserves and improve interest rate control.  More importantly, this approach would enable us to 
communicate our plans both clearly and in advance.  Doing so would allow markets and 
depository institutions to better prepare for a more proactive management of reserves and would 
December 18–19, 2018
14 of 242


 
 
 
ultimately reduce the risk of encountering unexpected behavior that could be difficult to 
interpret.  It would also be in keeping with our commitment toward greater transparency. 
Now, the downside is that the minimum level of reserves would be achieved later, with 
the risk that this entails.  Preliminary simulations made by our staff in Philadelphia indicate that 
if we stop redemptions a year from now, for example, at around $1.2 trillion in reserves, we 
would reach $1 trillion in reserves just about a year and a half later than in the baseline Tealbook 
projection.  The difference in the overall balance sheet size is quite small, though, and only 
temporary.  However, if the minimum level of reserves turns out to be much lower than 
expected, the delay can be substantial and the differences quite large. 
Overall, I believe that there is no need to pass through all of the uncertainty surrounding 
the demand for reserves to the asset side of the balance sheet.  An early stop to redemptions 
followed by reinvestments decouples the normalization of total asset holdings from that of 
reserves, decreases risks, and enables us to communicate better and ahead of time.  In other 
words, we’d be making normalization boring again, though I’m not going to make a hat saying 
those words.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to thank the staff for preparing 
these memos on how we might effectively manage our transition to a long-run operating regime.  
The memos outline a number of concerns related to the transition and provide several options for 
how to deal with these concerns.  To reiterate a point I’ve made before:   We believe that any 
number of the options proposed can be consistent with achieving our dual mandate effectively.  
Therefore, the choices before us should be determined primarily by operational efficiency, ease 
of public communications, and mitigating political repercussions. 
December 18–19, 2018
15 of 242


 
 
 
The St. Louis Fed continues to support a corridor system with ample reserves as the best 
operating regime.  It is worth noting that the corridor system is not an experimental design—it is 
used extensively and effectively by many other central banks today.  We believe that a corridor 
system should serve us well, both in the long run and in the transition.  The corridor would have 
two permanent standing facilities, with a reverse repo rate setting the floor and a repo rate setting 
the ceiling.  These facilities should be made available to a wide range of counterparties, 
including, at the very least, depository institutions. 
The prospect of converting Treasury securities rapidly into reserves on demand at the 
repo facility should, in our estimation, greatly reduce the demand for reserves—consistent with 
the 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans of minimizing the level of reserves 
necessary for the effective and efficient implementation of monetary policy. 
While not essential, the IOER rate could be set to zero and required reserves could be 
paid interest.  Ample reserves in the context of this system means nearly, but not completely, 
satiating the demand for reserves, so that the targeted money market rate remains just above the 
reverse repo floor rate. 
Our preferred policy framework does not let us determine the ultimate size of reserve 
balances.  The supply of reserves will be whatever is needed to achieve the interest rate control 
in a corridor system with money market rates trading near the floor.  Before 2008, reserve 
balances averaged around $10 billion.  By 2014, they had risen to $2.8 trillion and have since 
declined to a present level just above $1.7 trillion. 
The fact that the effective federal funds rate has recently risen to the IOER rate suggests 
that reserves may already be minimally abundant.  That reserves of this magnitude appear 
necessary for the conduct of monetary policy today largely reflects an enhanced post-crisis 
December 18–19, 2018
16 of 242


 
 
 
regulatory demand for liquidity among banks.  Any effort made on our part to enhance the 
economic or regulatory liquidity of Treasury securities should serve to reduce the demand for 
reserves in a manner consistent with our Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. 
In terms of the long-run composition of assets in the SOMA, we prefer a Treasuries-only 
portfolio with a maturity profile roughly consistent with that of the outstanding supply of U.S. 
Treasury securities.  The current redemption policy appears to have been absorbed smoothly in 
money markets.  We support continuing with the current runoff pace and composition, with 
careful monitoring as additional reserves are drained.  If anything, we would prefer to see a more 
rapid decline in the portion of the SOMA portfolio consisting of MBS while maintaining the 
current overall pace of balance sheet runoff. 
As I mentioned earlier, we believe that our preferred operating framework will serve us 
well in transition.  The primary concern in transition is how money market rates will behave as 
reserves are drained.  Although fixed-quantity open market operations may possibly be used to 
smooth unwanted spikes in money market rates, this action would require the Desk to monitor 
and know exactly what quantity to inject at the appropriate time.  We think a permanent repo 
facility will manage the risk in a more effective and systematic manner. 
There are many outstanding issues associated with implementing a corridor system, 
especially in regard to the repo facility.  It would be desirable for the staff to report back to 
policymakers on how soon such a facility could be implemented and what parameter decisions 
need to be made—such as the offering rate, counterparties, capacity limits, and so on.  Again, I 
want to thank the staff for their excellent work, and I look forward to reading their forthcoming 
analysis in this area.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
December 18–19, 2018
17 of 242


 
 
 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I emphasized at the previous FOMC 
meeting, I think our communications on the implementation framework should focus on 
principles.  In particular, the framework should focus on facilitating monetary policy 
transmission, should be able to address effectively a likely return to the effective lower bound, 
and should be able to address significant changes in the demand for reserves.  Consistent with 
those principles, I have three brief comments on the memos. 
First, when determining how to allocate our balance sheet, I would skew the composition 
of the balance sheet toward shorter-maturity Treasury securities, so we have the flexibility to 
lengthen the maturity of our balance sheet during economic downturns.  Moving to a portfolio 
more heavily weighted toward Treasury bills would give us the flexibility to use duration 
extension as a way to lower longer-term interest rates as a countercyclical tool, especially when 
we are near or at the effective lower bound. 
Second, I agree we should be doing much more communicating about the balance sheet.  
Some of the options discussed in the staff memos would have us take actions that minimize 
political-economy concerns about the size and volatility of our balance sheet but incur costs in 
the form of increased variability of short-term rates, perhaps weakening the monetary 
transmission mechanism.  I would prefer to highlight the fact that our balance sheet grows for 
natural reasons—such as rising demand for currency as the economy expands—and the point 
that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet is quite small relative to GDP compared with many 
other countries. 
Third, we should adopt a framework that enforces more of a ceiling on rates.  I might first 
try to use a primary credit rate to act as a ceiling on the federal funds or OBFR rate.  To do so, 
we would likely need to reduce the spread between the primary credit rate and the top of the 
December 18–19, 2018
18 of 242


 
 
 
policy rate range.  Should that be less effective than we wish, perhaps because banks are leery of 
borrowing from the discount window on account of stigma, we should be prepared to put in 
place a standing repo facility.  Such a facility might reach a smaller set of counterparties than the 
window, but those it did reach would be among the largest and most influential in determining 
short-term market rates.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  At our previous meeting, there seemed to be an 
emerging consensus favoring an abundant-reserves framework but also a desire to reduce the 
size of the balance sheet.  The reduction would demonstrate that the FOMC was able to unwind 
the LSAPs.  This might help to engender public acceptance of this tool and ensure its future 
availability. 
Due to the uncertainty about the level of reserves at which the demand curve flattens, it’s 
possible there could be tension between the desire to use an abundant-reserves framework and a 
desire to reduce the size of the balance sheet.  And we each may have different preferences over 
which of these goals should dominate. 
Before we can make a decision about the operating framework and communicate it, we’re 
going to need to confront this issue.  At this point, the staff estimates that reserves can be 
reduced further by $700 billion to $800 billion from current levels to about $1 trillion.  The 
staff’s dashboard of indicators suggests that we haven’t reached the point of scarcity of reserves.  
This set of indicators and the planned regular outreach to market participants will help us in 
getting, over time, a better sense of where the boundary lies between abundant and scarce 
reserves. 
December 18–19, 2018
19 of 242


 
 
 
In transitioning to a smaller balance sheet, I would not support altering the current pace 
of redemptions of Treasuries and MBS in the SOMA portfolio.  Maintaining the pace should 
help convey the fact that, as planned, we are following through with unwinding LSAPs, and we 
want our balance sheet to be no larger than is necessary to effectively implement monetary 
policy. 
A change in the announced redemption pace could be misinterpreted as a change in the 
stance of monetary policy.  If it becomes necessary to slow the pace of reserves decline 
temporarily, fixed-quantity open market operations will help preserve a distinction between this 
unwinding and normal monetary policy. 
If it turns out there is less scope for reductions in the size of the balance sheet than 
currently anticipated, I believe appropriate communications could help ensure that LSAPs 
remain a viable tool for the future. 
I endorse the suggestions in the memos about putting the size of our balance sheet into 
context, better explaining the sources of demand for the liabilities on our balance sheet, and 
explaining why our balance sheet will be larger than it was before the crisis.  We can do this 
now, even though we have yet to determine our desired operating framework.  It’s not too early 
to put together a communications plan. 
Regarding the transition to a smaller balance sheet, one fundamental question is, how 
much of the burden of adjustment should be placed on the market and how much on the FOMC?  
My expectation is that the market will be able to adapt quite well.  I doubt that it would be hard 
for banks to ramp up their activity in the federal funds market, if need be.  The Cleveland staff’s 
analysis indicates that all of the very large banks and 70 percent of all commercial banks have 
been active in the federal funds market each year since 2008.  They have maintained staff and 
December 18–19, 2018
20 of 242


 
 
 
systems to trade federal funds.  Before deciding whether the Federal Reserve should develop 
new facilities and intervene, I’d like to see more assessment of a likely market adjustment. 
Another fundamental question is, how much policy rate volatility should we be willing to 
accept?  How much volatility is compatible with interest rate control?  Presumably, volatility can 
be expected to be higher than it has been for much of the post-crisis period, when volatility 
across all markets has been extremely low by historical standards.  Since 2010, the daily absolute 
deviation of the effective federal funds rate from the midpoint of the target range has averaged 
just 3 basis points.  Volatility used to be much higher, with average daily absolute deviations of 
24 basis points in the 1980s, 14 in the 1990s, and 7 in the 2000s.  It’s possible we might be able 
to have adequate monetary control even without new facilities. 
While widening the target range to 35 basis points may be a way to signal that during the 
transition we expect to see more volatility, if we miss that wider range it could undermine our 
credibility.  I’d like to see more staff analysis of volatility to get a better sense of whether 
additional rate control facilities will be needed.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to thank the team for an excellent set 
of memos.  They helped me better understand a number of tricky issues associated with our goal 
of getting to the smallest balance sheet at which we can efficiently and effectively implement 
monetary policy.  But perhaps my biggest “takeaway” is the same one I had from our discussions 
last round.  There are significant advantages to operating monetary policy in a regime with 
abundant enough reserves to confidently keep us on the flat part of the reserve demand curve.  
Such a regime allows us to closely control the target interest rate in a way that is operationally 
December 18–19, 2018
21 of 242


 
 
 
simple, provides financial stability benefits, and works well in normal times as well as in 
circumstances that take us to the effective lower bound. 
Of course, our Policy Normalization Principles and Plans indicated that we aim to hold 
no more securities than was necessary for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary 
policy.  This commitment means we should probe for the lowest level of reserves at which the 
demand curve is still reliably flat.  But we need to be mindful of the fact that the “efficient and 
effective” criterion would not be met if we spent a lot of time on the steeply sloping portion of 
the reserve demand curve.  We should also not forget another benefit of abundant reserves—
namely, the role of reserves in providing liquidity buffers.  Without an adequate substitute, we 
don’t want to negate this important financial-stability benefit by reducing reserves too much. 
I had mentioned benefits.  What about the cost side of the larger balance sheet?  Basic 
Milton Friedman monetary economics says that creating reserves uses no resources and has zero 
marginal cost.  So reserves shouldn’t be made unnecessarily scarce unless there are other 
important costs neglected in this accounting. 
I understand that several on the Committee see some costs in terms of external criticisms 
of a large balance sheet.  Needless to say, these costs lie outside the realm of standard monetary 
accounting.  Perhaps it is reasonable to give up some degree of economic efficiency and allow 
more complexity, in order to avoid these political-economy-like costs.  But when deciding the 
long-run level of reserves that we should aim for in order to conduct monetary policy, my 
preference would be to put more emphasis on efficiency and less on “as small as possible.”  I 
would prefer putting my thumb on the scale for simplicity, in this case. 
In any event, we are committed to searching for a lower level of reserves than today’s 
level.  As we draw closer to the point at which the reserve demand curve steepens, we will likely 
December 18–19, 2018
22 of 242


 
 
 
encounter some volatility in the federal funds and OBFR rates, as well as in related short-term 
money market rates.  If this volatility is not expected to be too large or too costly, then I would 
prefer to avoid a “belt-and-suspender” approach using the various interest rate control tools 
mentioned in the staff memo.  Instead, I think it would be helpful to move IOER further below 
the top of the range. 
I think this is a simpler way to help keep the policy rate in the target range and has a 
reasonable chance of success.  Indeed, it might be best to have IOER near the bottom of the 
range.  After all, as we reduce reserves further, transitory upward rate spikes seem much more 
likely than sharp declines.  I also would favor doing this sometime early next year. 
What about the next step in the process?  I am concerned about the following possibility.  
Suppose we collect enough information to determine the lowest level of reserves that puts us on 
the flat part of the demand curve, and this is larger than some on the Committee might find 
comfortable.  What if it is, say, $1.5 trillion or $1.2 trillion?  To operate on the flat part of the 
demand curve with a smaller balance sheet, we would then have to do something to substantially 
lower banks’ demand for reserves or to reduce our other liabilities.  But my reading of the staff 
memos is that our options for doing either of these come with pretty notable uncertainties and 
costs.  Indeed, I think they may actually add enough risk that they wouldn’t be worth doing at all.  
In particular, the institutional remedies in the memos undertaken to avoid “optical” concerns 
about a large balance sheet might come with their own optical concerns.  For instance, a new 
standing facility used only by large financial institutions might be “spun” as a case of the Fed 
favoring access for large Wall Street banks over smaller Main Street institutions. 
So we may end up being left with a choice between one regime with large and abundant 
reserves that easily operates on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve and another regime 
December 18–19, 2018
23 of 242


 
 
 
with a substantially smaller balance sheet.  But we may not be able to have both.  A flat demand 
curve and a comfortably-small balance sheet simply may not be compatible.  If so, I would be 
skeptical about the possibility that incurring the costs of reducing our balance sheet in order to 
avoid nonstandard costs would be consistent with promoting monetary and financial conditions 
to support maximum employment and price stability as best we can.  Our long long-run 
framework choices need to be consistent with this monetary policy objective.  For example, I am 
uncomfortable with the political-economy argument that maintaining the viability of future QE 
operations at the effective lower bound requires us to select a small SOMA, or balance sheet, 
today.  We should at least discuss the economics of these arguments much more. 
In sum, I still think we have some hard work ahead of us to get a ful understanding of the 
issues and tradeoffs before we make our final decisions regarding the implementation 
framework.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic, please. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I’d like to also thank the staff for their 
work on these memos.  The proposed toolkits for assessing funding market pressures and 
enhancing monetary control, as well as the institutional detail on how banks and other market 
participants might change their behavior as reserve levels shrink, provide valuable context for 
thinking about monetary policy implementation as the balance sheet gets smaller. 
The memos, however, left me a bit confused on the bigger picture.  I came out of the 
previous meeting feeling as though we had achieved a fair degree of consensus regarding a 
preferred new long-run framework:  to run an abundant-reserves regime—that is, operate on the 
flat portion of the demand curve—and rely upon the overnight bank fund rate.  Further, there was 
acknowledgement that the FOMC’s communications at the outset of the implementation of its 
December 18–19, 2018
24 of 242


 
 
 
balance sheet policy—that the actions were temporary, in response to a deep emergency—
needed to be respected, implying that reserves should not be too abundant even in an abundant-
reserves regime. 
Against that background, the memos left me with the impression that my presumption 
about that consensus is in doubt.  In my reading of the memos, many of the descriptions of 
potential commercial bank behavior and market functioning suggest that we may be transitioning 
to a world in which reserves will be scarce with some frequency.  Such transitions would, as the 
memos nicely outline, involve complex operations, and perhaps new tools, in order to achieve 
reasonable monetary control.  But I fear this assumes the answer to a question that has not been 
directly asked—namely, whether the Committee is comfortable operating a switching regime, 
toggling between abundant- and scarce-reserves states. 
The answer to this question has clear implications for how the Committee would resolve 
the challenge of operationalizing the notion of reserves that are not too abundant.  As written in 
the memos, there is an implied view that we should get as close to the margin as possible and 
take on fully all costs and risks associated with going beyond that.  Is that where the Committee 
is?  I’m not sure this is where I am.  The complexity associated with executing this and the 
possibility of less monetary control represent significant costs and, for me, only reinforce the 
position that I took at the November meeting in favor of an abundant-reserves regime—a 
continuous abundant-reserves regime—as our long-run framework. 
So where are we now?  As we continue with passive runoff of our LSAPs, we have an 
opportunity to learn a great deal and perhaps resolve some of our current uncertainty about how 
funding markets and rate volatility are related to the level of reserves.  The metrics and outreach 
December 18–19, 2018
25 of 242


 
 
 
plans proposed in the memos provide a good foundation on which to build a monitoring 
program—one that I hope will be presented to the Committee on a regular basis. 
I would like to note that the discussion of possibilities for reducing the size of the balance 
sheet by lowering the demand for reserves and nonreserve liabilities was something of a surprise.  
I interpreted this memo as suggesting that we might like to move the kink to the left.  Put another 
way, this memo suggests that reducing the absolute quantity of reserves to some particular level 
is important for the Committee.  This possibility was certainly not in my mind during our 
previous meeting.  I am open to discussing this option, but the pursuit of active management of 
the demand for reserves would, in my mind, require an extensive conversation—one that 
explicitly considers the costs and benefits of driving to much lower levels of reserves as well as 
the efficacy and risks of the reserve demand management options. 
I will say that I am very supportive of exploring communications strategies to increase 
the public’s understanding of our balance sheet.  Like others, I prefer a focus on the reality that 
the balance sheet evolves for reasons beyond our control. 
Finally, I am curious where we stand on the question of the preferred policy rate.  I heard 
from my staff that work has been done on a timeline for transitioning from EFFR to OBFR, and 
that the entire changeover may take as much as a year.  I would appreciate hearing updates on 
this process as well.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the staff for the excellent 
memos.  I’m just going to make a few comments.  First, as your memo suggested, I do think it’s 
important to work on tools that will manage rate turbulence, even if it’s transitory, if we’re to 
find out how low it is appropriate for the balance sheet to go.  So I would encourage the staff to 
December 18–19, 2018
26 of 242


 
 
 
make a deeper study of ceiling facilities, I think as you suggested, whether it’s a standing repo 
facility or some modification discount window. 
Two, I think as I discussed in the previous meeting, I am in favor of looking at a tiered 
remuneration of reserves, which would provide banks with incentives about managing their 
demand for reserves.  I am also in favor, as was mentioned earlier, of a facility to allow banks to 
monetize their holdings of Treasury securities more quickly.  This would also make reductions in 
reserves more feasible.  And so I’d like to see those tools, and the viability of those tools, 
examined more fully. 
I am in favor of thinking sooner rather than later about the composition of the balance 
sheet, and it may be worthwhile taking actions in the near future by fine-tuning reinvestments or, 
as some have said, even selling mortgage-backed securities—in other words, gravitate the 
portfolio to a higher percentage of Treasury securities.  And I do think it makes sense to 
explicitly examine what’s happening with our weighted-average life on Treasury securities.  I 
think President Rosengren mentioned that it might be wiser to have a shorter maturity, and I 
think that does make sense.  And I’m very cognizant of the fact that our weighted-average 
maturity is actually lengthening, because we’re buying nonbill issuance by the Treasury in 
proportion that they’re issued.  I just want to make sure we’re explicitly deciding that we want to 
lengthen our weighted-average maturity of Treasury securities. 
Lastly, I do think it’s worth, as we said in the previous meeting, suggesting to our 
supervisory group to study the topic of excess reserves and how excess reserves relate to bank 
leverage standards and whether there are ways—without compromising prudent supervisory 
policy—to encourage the removal of excess reserves from bank leverage standards, as a means 
of reducing reserves.  I think those are all my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
December 18–19, 2018
27 of 242


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, like others, I would like to thank the 
staff for the set of memos.  A lot of thought and hard work went into these—in particular, 
covering a large amount of complex information at a very high level. 
I myself continue to support the view that we want to have the smallest balance sheet 
consistent with effective implementation of our monetary policy.  With regard to composition, 
realizing the challenges ahead—primarily, the Treasury securities portfolio—I believe that this 
will involve taking a relative assertive stance in testing how low that we can go, and I think it 
will likely be important for the Committee to be willing to be patient and tolerant of some 
uncertainty and volatility as we explore how far we can go in this direction.  And although I 
think we’ve learned a lot, I think it’s important, at least as of today, not to close off too many 
options at this point.  In particular, I hear different views about abundance, for starters.  I think 
that, while we have thought deeply about what the demand for reserves might look like in the 
future, we are still learning a lot as we go along, and I think we’ll need to be flexible about the 
steps that we take. 
I’ll just conclude with a thought, because some of what I’ve said has already been 
mentioned by other participants.  And in particular, the one factor in this that I continue to look 
at is how the system that we’re currently in would operate if it became more like the original 
thinking that a floor system would operate, in which IOER would be a floor and the funds rate 
would regularly trade above it, but obviously not too far above so it wouldn’t endanger 
achievement of the range.  And I think there’s a lot of uncertainty about this, but I think it’s 
important that we at least understand, because, to me, the tradeoff is between being willing to 
allow the funds rate to trade above the floor—a willingness that might entail a reduction in the 
December 18–19, 2018
28 of 242


 
 
 
balance sheet size that we would need to have to make the system operate—and trying to keep 
the funds rate at or below the IOER rate.  So, again, a range of things to consider, and I 
encourage further work on this.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thanks.  I’d like to focus my comments on the size and composition of 
the balance sheet.  As I said last time, I think it’s important for our credibility that we find a 
visible way to “tie a bow” around the end of our balance sheet expansion, and my comments, I 
think, echo very much President Kaplan’s. 
I think it’s worth trying to find a way to encourage banks to hold fewer reserves in a floor 
system, in the way the memos outlined.  This could potentially be done with a pricing 
mechanism, maybe by paying lower interest on excess reserves above some threshold.  Or we 
might also want to create facilities that allow the monetization of Treasuries at very short notice, 
such as late in the day.  Unlike others, I believe this is doable without creating inefficiency or 
losing control of monetary policy.  But, like President Evans, I’d welcome analysis on this to 
learn more. 
I also think we’d benefit from a more targeted communications strategy than that defined 
in the memos.  The political concerns are mainly over the quantity of excess reserves more than 
the size of other Federal Reserve liabilities.  I think we can explore an approach to balance sheet 
accounting and reporting that separates reserves from the rest of our liabilities and communicates 
directly about the reductions we make to excess reserves.  Doing so will lessen confusion and I 
think it has the ability to lower the number we’re discussing to billions, not trillions. 
Finally, an additional way to underline the change in regime would be to make explicit a 
plan to move to Treasuries-only over a set time frame.  Treasuries represent a much less 
December 18–19, 2018
29 of 242


 
 
 
politically-charged portfolio item.  The current path of the reduction of MBS holdings still 
envisions us having MBS on our balance sheet in 2040.  That’s just too distant a horizon to be 
credible.  We can and should outline a plan to reduce such holdings to zero in a predictable and 
timely manner.  In my mind, such a plan would end reinvestments.  It would define a timetable 
like the one Kathryn suggested for selling MBS that manages market reaction and loss 
realization.  And, frankly, it would also be a strong signal if we ceased operational testing. 
All of the above helps send a clear message that this particular balance sheet expansion 
period has come to an end. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everyone, I want to thank the staff for 
those extremely clear and concise memos.  They just keep getting better and better—even in the 
short year that I’ve been here. 
So, for me, there are a few questions that I think we particularly ought to focus on, 
although they’re obvious.  When do we stop the balance sheet runoffs?  For some time, we’ve 
been saying:  We will get there when we get there; we’ll know that when we reach the steep part 
of the demand curve for reserves.  But it turns out that—as one thinks more about that—that still 
implies a potential range of sizes for the balance sheet.  It’s not as though there’s a clear and 
precise number that comes from reaching the steep part of the demand curve.  So when do we 
stop the balance sheet runoff?  How do we maintain interest rate control in the presence of the 
temporary shocks that there are likely to be to the demand for reserves—not just during the 
transition, but even when we reach whatever it is that we define as normal?  And what do we 
want a normalized balance sheet to look like? 
December 18–19, 2018
30 of 242


 
 
 
On the first question of when to stop, I think, like many of you—although there doesn’t 
seem to be as much of a consensus in this meeting as there was in the previous meeting—I would 
prefer to operate with the smallest balance sheet possible while still maintaining effective interest 
rate control.  And, absent a lending facility that would provide a ceiling on rates, I think that 
decision at the most basic level hinges on how comfortable we are in conducting open market 
operations to meet temporary shocks to demand.  And maybe that explains a little bit of the 
difference between what had seemed sort of a universal view favoring the smallest balance sheet 
possible and the current discussion saying, well, yes, as small as possible, but not smaller. 
The bigger the balance sheet, the less likely a temporary shock would push the interest 
rate outside the target range, and the smaller the balance sheet, the more likely we’d have to take 
action to offset temporary increases in the demand for reserves.  So, really, it’s our assessment of 
the balance between the cost of a large balance sheet and the cost of frequent open market 
operations that’s key to determining what the size of that normalized balance sheet is. 
I think, at least, that we have a good handle on the “cosmic” costs of a large balance 
sheet, but I think we could—I, at least, would appreciate more staff analysis on the cost of more 
frequent open market operations.  And I, at least, took that sort of as the call—like President 
Evans and President Bostic, I’ve been thinking about “Why does this sound different from last 
time?”  It really is, what are the costs to the system—again, the cosmic costs to the system—of 
more frequent open market operations if we’re on that track? 
On another track from this fundamental tradeoff on volatility is what actions we might 
take to decrease the steady-state demand for reserves.  And the staff has provided a helpful menu 
of options.  I’ll comment on only a few of them. 
December 18–19, 2018
31 of 242


 
 
 
One option was the introduction of a facility to monetize bank holdings of Treasuries on 
demand.  That obviously could certainly lead to an increase in the volatility of our balance sheet 
if we do that.  As a practical matter, the memo cites as an example of when a bank might want to 
use this facility as when the bank thinks it would receive a below-market price if it tried to sell a 
large quantity of securities.  But if a bank believes that the price it gets for selling the securities 
into the market is not the market price, then how would we determine the market price if we’re 
doing that, this unobserved market price?  I think that the practical difficulties of doing that 
would be significant. 
On the question of how to maintain interest rate control, I liked the suggestion of 
President Evans.  Particularly with respect to IOER, this sort of gradual stepping-down that we 
seem to be doing with each meeting—I think that’s different from feeling our way down the 
staircase with respect to the size of the balance sheet.  And we could sort of quickly move down 
to something much closer to where we think that IOER would get.  I think that’s a separate 
question.  And maybe that’s 5 basis points above the ON RRP rate, maybe it’s something 
different, but I think I’d benefit from more staff analysis of where that gap ought to be.  And if 
we have a feeling as to where we ought to be comfortable with that gap, couldn’t we just move 
IOER down now to be at what we think is a safe floor rate, even before we have any shrinking of 
the balance sheet? 
On the option of widening the target range, I myself don’t find that very appealing 
principally as a communications matter.  I think it would be difficult to communicate that change 
in a way that didn’t sound like we were simply defining away the problem, in a manner similar 
to my middle son explaining that “in the larger scheme of things, a B is a very good grade, Dad.”  
[Laughter] 
December 18–19, 2018
32 of 242


 
 
 
And then, finally, on the question of what we want a normalized balance sheet to look 
like, at some point I would be in favor of actively running off holdings of MBS.  I think we 
wouldn’t want to do that before we reached whatever we thought the normalized size of the 
balance sheet ought to be because then we’d get very confused in communicating what it is that 
we’re doing.  Is runoff in MBS holdings part of shrinking the size of the balance sheet?  I think 
it’s easier to explain that as a different task once we’ve got the size of the balance sheet that we 
want.  And then, in connection with accelerating the reduction of the MBS portion of the 
portfolio, I too agree with President Rosengren and others who have argued for shortening the 
average maturity.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the staff for the 
excellent memos, which were mercifully concise but also thorough. 
My preference continues to be for reserves, as many others have said, to be as small as 
possible within the floor system.  And I think the staff memos were very helpful in laying out 
techniques, in order to try to explore how small that is.  I think there is still a lot of uncertainty 
about where the destination is, and so I like what was presented. 
I do support the development of enhanced ceiling facilities.  I think the usage of the 
facilities would give us additional information, and I’m open-minded as to whether they’re 
temporary or might be permanent. 
One point that I found somewhat confusing is that some of the facilities sounded like 
temporary ceilings, some of them sounded like these Treasury-security monetization facilities.  
Are those the same facilities?  Are those different facilities?  So I thought there was a lot of 
complexity buried underneath these various facilities. 
December 18–19, 2018
33 of 242


 
 
 
I would prefer the facilities to be OMO-eligible collateral only and the counterparties to 
include all depository institutions (DIs), not just dealers.  But I think President Evans said this—I 
would put a premium on simplicity.  When we think about primary credit still being out there, 
the potential for these new facilities in certain situations, I think it gets very complex very 
quickly. 
And one thing that struck me was the last memo about all of the nonreserve liability 
elements of the balance sheet.  It really put a spotlight for me on how limited we may be in, in 
fact, shrinking the balance sheet.  And so we may not get as many benefits, in terms of political 
economy, as I expected when we started this work.  And so then that would be a tradeoff.  
Maybe the benefits of going a very complicated route are not going to be realized, in view of the 
fact that there are all of these other parts of our balance sheet that we’ve got limited ability to try 
to shrink. 
In terms of the long-term balance sheet, I, too, prefer a Treasuries-only balance sheet, and 
my gut tells me that we’re safest having the composition match the market rather than just, as a 
general statement, always trying to weigh in on the shape of the yield curve.  But I’m open to 
hearing other arguments about that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I think I’m 12th, so let me “12th” the thanks to the 
staff for the excellent memos and, as President Kashkari said, for their being mercifully short and 
concise. 
As we transition to a new long-run operating framework, one important principle—which 
many, many people have mentioned—is transparency, clear communication.  Making it clear to 
markets and the public and the Congress what we are trying to achieve and how we plan to get 
December 18–19, 2018
34 of 242


 
 
 
there will help avoid uncertainty and ultimately support a smooth transition.  When I’m talking 
about this with contacts in the field, whether they’re from financial institutions or businesses, 
they continually say that “If we know the rules, we can adjust to anything; but in the absence of 
knowledge, it’s very difficult.”  So I think that’s an important principle to remember. 
In this context, I’m very much in favor of the multifaceted—I always call it dashboard—
approach that the staff reviewed to monitoring and assessing whether we have reached the steep 
part of the demand curve for reserves.  But clear communications there about what we are doing 
and why it’s important to do this monitoring is going to be important.  I think it’s important to 
emphasize that we need to know where the kink is, in order for us to understand how to manage 
our portfolio.  Similarly, ending redemptions is an example of where communication can help.  
As we get close to ending redemptions, it might very well be useful to taper them.  I don’t have 
an answer for that today.  But we did do this when we started, and it might be useful to do it 
again. 
So communicating such a soft landing well in advance, along with the rationale for such 
an approach, is essential.  It will allow banks to plan ahead and will minimize, importantly—and 
I underscore this—confusion and misperception that we are varying the pace of redemptions to 
change the stance of policy.  To keep it in the background and make it like paint drying, we have 
to be more communicative, so that people understand why we’re doing it. 
As we get closer to the stopping point, good communication can also help us in concerns 
about temporary funds movements above the range.  It looks like we might face those, so it’s 
important to have people understand that could happen and how long that’s likely to persist.  
And here I’m not very confident that the discount window will be a good tool to control rates.  
The stigma concerning borrowing looks, to me, tough to overcome—no matter what we might 
December 18–19, 2018
35 of 242


 
 
 
say—and some insurance against spikes will be important.  In that regard, I support doing more 
staff analysis of a repo facility to set an effective ceiling on the target range. 
Finally, I think, like others here—and I just want to emphasize this point—I’d like to step 
back from the details and actually advocate that we could do a better job, at least by my 
assessment, of communicating to the public what was detailed in the final memo.  And that is 
that the simple fact is that growth in our balance sheet is going to be driven in large part by 
nonreserve liabilities, such as U.S. currency and the Treasury General Account.  And that’s just 
going to be a fact that’s going to be hard for us to overcome.  Increasingly, that number is going 
to get closer to 3 trillion dollars and approach the size of the balance sheet after the crisis, and 
this will have nothing to do with whether we choose an abundant-reserves regime or not.  I think 
building the public’s understanding of this, starting immediately, while no doubt challenging—I 
won’t say this will be easy—will, to my mind, be far better than trying to economize on 
nonreserve liabilities whose provision is a natural function of a central bank in serving the 
public.  So that’s a principle I don’t want us to lose sight of.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I, too, want to commend the staff for the excellent 
memos.  In refining and communicating our balance sheet framework, I would indicate my own 
ranking of the principles that should govern it as, first, demonstrating effective control of interest 
rates; second, maintaining the IOER as our key tool for setting and communicating monetary 
policy away from the effective lower bound but giving ourselves capacity and flexibility to 
deploy the balance sheet effectively when we get toward the effective lower bound; third, 
providing as much clarity and simplicity as possible on the framework governing the balance 
sheet—as we’ve seen in a few other instances, market participants do adjust their behavior 
December 18–19, 2018
36 of 242


 
 
 
effectively when we communicate clearly in advance; and, finally, normalizing reserves at a 
level that’s no more than necessary for effective implementation of policy in an abundant-
reserves system, while recognizing that the balance sheet will continue to grow, because of 
autonomous factors, and that the demand for reserves is also likely to fluctuate over time. 
That prioritization leads me to be inclined to explore the feasibility of communicating in 
advance a rough target for the amount of reserves at which balance sheet runoff will cease, 
allowing for a comfortable buffer.  That might be akin to what President Harker suggested and 
would have the benefit of “tying a bow” on it, as President Barkin suggested.  There are obvious 
risks associated with such an approach:  on the one hand, the risk that we encounter volatility 
before that target is reached and, on the other hand, the risk that that inflection point occurs 
before the absolute minimum is achieved—before we’ve identified that kink. 
From where we are today, it doesn’t appear to me that the risks associated with the 
reserve target being too large are very great.  Reserves are currently $1.75 trillion.  On the basis of 
the survey, it appears that reserves below $800 billion will likely put us in a regime of reserves 
scarcity.  To avoid the risk of stumbling onto the steep part of the demand curve, we may want to 
allow a comfortable buffer above that level.  Suppose, for instance—and I chose a number that 
happens to be the same as President Harker’s—we announce a target of $1.2 trillion.  As the 
balance sheet is projected to grow because of autonomous factors over time, it’s an open 
question whether the optics of having that inflection point occurring around $1.2 trillion in 
reserves rather than at, for instance, $1 trillion in reserves are dramatically different. 
A further reason for announcing a target level for reserves well in advance is to limit any 
confusion as to the stance of monetary policy during the final stages of that transition.  If we 
announce a rough target, there’ll be clear conditions known well in advance associated with the 
December 18–19, 2018
37 of 242


 
 
 
contours of the balance sheet.  If, instead, we try to fine-tune the level of reserves by driving 
them down to the point at which we identify that kink in the demand curve between the steep 
part and the flat part, in that case, as the staff memo points out, it may well be necessary to slow 
down the pace of balance sheet runoff in that final stage to avoid disruptive volatility; and that, in 
turn, may run the risk of confusing the public as to whether the slowdown represents a shift in 
the stance of monetary policy, particularly considering the time at which we anticipate that 
process to be taking place. 
Furthermore, an approach that seeks to reach the minimum level of reserves by driving 
them down to that kink at which we see some volatility raises the question of whether that 
would, in effect, be a permanent feature of the operating framework.  And I think this gets to the 
points that Presidents Bostic and Evans were raising.  Because the balance sheet will presumably 
resume growing after the inflection point is reached and the demand for reserves will continue 
changing, the question we would want to ask ourselves is whether we would want to maintain 
that tightness in the supply of reserves right at that kink between the flat and steep parts of the 
demand curve as an ongoing feature of the new operating framework indefinitely.  If so, that new 
framework would feature some amount of volatility and active intervention as a permanent 
feature, not just at the minimum.  Alternatively, if we don’t see the necessity of maintaining the 
supply of reserves close to that kink, then the final stages of the normalization risk being much 
more volatile than necessary, and it’s not clear that will have benefit beyond that point. 
All of that said, in the case in which we do decide to move toward identifying that kink, 
I’m comfortable supporting the innovations the staff proposed—in particular, a repo ceiling 
facility with an expanded set of counterparties.  But, again, the question is whether those won’t 
December 18–19, 2018
38 of 242


 
 
 
be transitional but will, in fact, become permanent features of the new framework.  In any case, I 
support moving IOER further down toward the bottom of the range. 
Finally, apart from the stopping point, I do think it’s very important to communicate well 
in advance to market participants the target composition of our portfolio.  Over time, I strongly 
support moving to a Treasury securities-only portfolio.  In addition, I would be very inclined to 
explore the benefits and risks of moving to a predominantly bills-only allocation of between 
40 and 60 percent, including better understanding the implications for our footprint in the 
market.  Like Presidents Rosengren and Kaplan, I think that, from a monetary policy perspective, 
there’s a benefit from a larger share of Treasury bills in our portfolio, in providing space for a 
maturity extension, should the economy weaken.  So I’d be very interested in seeing further 
analysis that would help us decide how large a share of Treasury bills in our portfolio might be 
feasible.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I think everything has been 
said several times.  [Laughter]  But there’s plenty of time left, so I will embark. 
I want to go back to President Bostic’s question, because I think it’s kind of at the heart 
of the matter here.  We did have a pretty good discussion in November, and I think there was, as 
you said, strong support for a particular approach.  But the approach had two elements:  One was 
with regard to abundant reserves, and the second was—and it’s been repeated by many around 
the table—subject to this minimum size of the balance sheet consistent with the effective and 
efficient implementation of monetary policy. 
So, as Governor Brainard pointed out, if you say, “Well, $1.2 trillion is good, that kind of 
achieves our goals”—then a lot of our discussion in the memos and some of these issues just 
December 18–19, 2018
39 of 242


 
 
 
don’t arise.  But if you really think that the definition of the condition of minimum size of our 
balance sheet consistent with efficient and effective implementation of policy is a smaller 
balance sheet or one that could potentially be smaller, then I think a number of these issues rise 
to being of more practical importance. 
I do want to go back to what President Rosengren started with and Governor Brainard 
ended with and many others commented on.  It’s going back to principles regarding what we’re 
trying to achieve here.  In the first, when I think of principles, I try to separate out monetary 
policy decisions.  What’s the stance of monetary policy needed to achieve our dual-mandate 
goals, and how do we exactly operationalize and execute that?  I think the one concern I have, as 
many have mentioned, is that adjustments to, say, how quickly we shrink the balance sheet could 
spill over into a statement about our policy stance or our view of future monetary policy.  I do 
think we really do want to be careful and not inadvertently signal what are taken to be monetary 
policy intentions through decisions we make concerning the operational framework. 
I also believe that interest rate control is absolutely essential here.  It’s easy to say that 
there’s daily volatility in the funds rate or OBFR, and that wouldn’t be problematic.  But we 
really want to make sure that, when the Committee says we want interest rates in a certain range 
or a certain point, our framework can deliver that and with a great deal of confidence.  I think 
that’s another concern I have or principle that I have. 
The other—I’m cheating here.  I’m looking at President Rosengren’s list, because I 
agreed with it completely, and it’s been mentioned by others too.  [Laughter]  We need to—well, 
he wrote it all out very clearly—have a framework that allows us to, in the case of what I think 
of as a likely return to the effective lower bound in the future, again, a framework that is well 
suited for that. 
December 18–19, 2018
40 of 242


 
 
 
I come to a couple of conclusions on the basis of that.  One is, I do think that, to the 
extent that we are likely to try to bring the size of our balance sheet or the level of reserves down 
to what we think the minimum is consistent with our principles, we do need to have some 
facilities, or at least preparations, regarding how we’re going to maintain interest rate control.  
My main concern is with respect to spikes in interest rates that are persistent—interest rates 
running consistently higher during that period.  It could be due to a transitory shift.  This is why 
some of the memo discussion about transitions versus a more persistent scarcity, I think, is 
important for thinking about this,.  Whether it’s open market operations or a ceiling facility or 
something like that, I do think that the Committee would be well served by further work by the 
staff presenting us sometime next year with some concrete options.  Like, if we want to make 
sure we have interest rate control even as the balance sheet shrinks over the next period of time, 
what are the concrete options?  How would they work?  What are the pros and cons of those?  I 
think that’s an important lesson coming out of the briefings and today’s discussion. 
I also think that the communication, as many people have said, is really important here.  
But it’s important for two reasons.  One is the “paint drying” issue.  One of the reasons the 
balance sheet normalization has gone well is because we thought about it hard.  We worked it all 
out in advance, and we communicated and communicated and communicated it.  We want to be 
in that same situation when we eventually get to this point at which scarcity maybe starts to show 
itself.  We want to have communicated effectively how we’re going to maintain interest rate 
control and how we will operationalize that, whether it’s a transitory shift in reserves or in other 
liabilities or more persistent developments. 
I also think it’s really important for us to start wrapping our minds around how we 
communicate the balance sheet in the long run.  This issue about the decomposition of the 
December 18–19, 2018
41 of 242


 
 
 
balance sheet between MBS and Treasury security holdings—we don’t need to make decisions 
on that today, but I think it’s very helpful to understand we’re at a 40 percent MBS share of the 
SOMA portfolio today.  We’re going to be at 40 percent MBS for a long time.  It’s going to be a 
very long time before we are completely free of the MBS in our portfolio.  Thinking through that 
in advance—not necessarily to make a decision in the short run, but to think about how we 
would approach deciding on how to maybe move us more quickly toward an all-Treasury 
securities portfolio and how to communicate that. 
But more importantly, this issue of the composition of our portfolio of Treasury securities 
is going to hit us once we stop reinvesting—I mean, once we get to this “pivot point,” once we 
start buying securities again.  This is not a decision that is theoretical over the next 20 years.  
This is a decision that arises because, once we get to this minimum balance sheet, we’re going to 
be buying stuff; and when we start buying stuff, we really need to be thinking about, what’s the 
desired composition of the portfolio, T-bills versus the rest?  How do we view that?  And, again, 
on the “paint drying” principle, it would be best if we make those decisions well in advance and 
communicate that well in advance.  And then it’s just a question of executing on that, when we 
do get there. 
So, again, like everybody, I thought the staff memos were wonderfully concise and helpful, 
but also it would be really helpful for us to take that next step early next year in coming to some 
very concrete decisions on these matters and communicating them as soon as possible and, again, 
I’m looking for the staff to help us with some specific ways to move forward.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you, Vice Chair, and thanks, everyone, for a very 
interesting set of comments.  My kudos, as well, to the staff, for producing a set of memos that 
December 18–19, 2018
42 of 242


 
 
 
were not only helpful, but light, in the sense of being able to be carried around without a 
wheelbarrow. 
I also share that I have a feeling of continuing to learn more and more about this.  I feel 
like every time we talk about it, I learn more things.  I also suspect that we’re going to get to the 
end of this process in a year or so and look back—and see a bunch of what will be blindingly 
obvious things in hindsight, but that we’re just going to be learning along the way.  And I think 
that means we’ll have to remain flexible and open-minded as we go forward. 
Last year, we began the process of normalizing our balance sheet.  And the Committee 
has long emphasized that we would eventually return the balance sheet to a size that’s no larger 
than it needs to be to conduct policy in our chosen framework.  I do see this as a high-profile 
commitment that we need to honor; and doing so, in my view, would do much to support the 
legitimacy of future large-scale asset purchases—by showing that QE is not just a one-way street 
to an ever-larger Federal Reserve balance sheet relative to GDP.  I think that the bigger picture is 
that we are probably in a lower-rate environment for a long period of time, and I think we should 
be doing everything we can to find, locate, and manufacture every scrap of policy space that we 
possibly can, because we may need it.  And this is one way to go about that.  It is not found in 
monetary textbooks, but it nonetheless, in my view, is important. 
I also agree, though, that a big part of this load needs to be carried by more and better 
public communications, as many of you have noted.  We will have to do much more explaining 
of what’s really driving the size of the balance sheet’s demand for our liabilities and, 
particularly, reserves and currency and the social benefits of all the other liabilities.  I believe 
strongly in all of that. 
December 18–19, 2018
43 of 242


 
 
 
I do think, in the end, it will not be sufficient to convince those who have concerns about 
QE as implying an ever rising balance sheet as a percentage of GDP.  So I do think it’s necessary 
to do what we can to be seen to have worked hard to get to a smaller balance sheet.  It’s not just 
that we get down to scarce reserves, it’s that we be seen to work hard to do it—that we take the 
commitment seriously.  In effect, to me, that means we “reserve” judgment, in a sense, until we 
have really made further progress. 
That said, at the previous meeting there was very broad support for remaining in a 
framework with abundant reserves, and I think the process over the next year is going to tell us 
the extent to which we can have a much smaller balance sheet alongside abundant reserves.  And 
my strong sense is that if we can get to a much smaller balance sheet, then the choice of a regime 
with abundant reserves would be straightforward.  The words “much smaller” are in the eye of 
the beholder.  As I said in my remarks at the previous meeting, to me, a case that’s close to the 
staff baseline of $1 trillion or $1.2 trillion would do the trick for me. 
I think what I would be concerned about is a case in which we find, counterfactually or 
counter to our expectations, that equilibrium reserve demand is $1.5 trillion or something like 
that, and then I think I would have buyer’s remorse if we had made a formal decision to go 
ahead.  I don’t think that’s going to be the case.  I mean, in anything like the cases we were 
talking about, there won’t be difficult tradeoffs.  I sense a lot of angst around the table about 
tradeoffs and efficiency and things like that.  I don’t think they’re likely to emerge, really.  The 
work that Simon, Lorie, and their colleagues have done is very persuasive to me that there is 
significant “room to run” on reserves, and that means that we won’t eventually face these 
tradeoffs.  Nonetheless, I think it behooves us to be seen to be taking our time in getting to the 
answer of what corresponds to abundant reserves. 
December 18–19, 2018
44 of 242


 
 
 
As for the memos, I think they do a great job of laying out some of the issues we’ll face 
along the road to normalization.  To begin, how do we know we’re reaching scarcity of reserves, 
and how can we tell the difference between temporary pressures on short-term rates—as market 
participants adjust to a shrinking pool of reserves—and more permanent pressures associated 
with being on the steep portion of the demand curve?  There’s also the related question of the 
policy tools we may want to have at our disposal, should our transition to a smaller balance sheet 
become bumpy as temporary pressures on money market rates build up. 
I found quite helpful the staff’s discussion of various guideposts that we could use to 
assess where we are on that road, and I take some comfort from seeing that none of those 
guideposts discussed is signaling that the end of the road is near.  I especially appreciated the two 
pages, I guess, in the second memo that laid out the reserves-scarcity indicators, and I’ll be 
interested to see that be updated over time.  In addition, I applaud the idea of relying on surveys 
and outreach as means of assessing banks’ demand for reserves and other market conditions. 
While the process has been remarkably smooth so far, the first and second memos raised 
the possibility that things could get bumpy.  For instance, as reserve balances fall, some banks 
might not adjust their liquidity management practices quickly enough, which could cause the 
federal funds rate to trade above the target range for a while.  Further technical adjustments to 
the IOER rate might prove inadequate to sustain the desired level of rate control, so I look 
favorably on other approaches—such as standard open market operations and a standing repo 
facility—that would mirror our existing reverse repo facility.  Ceiling tools that could be more 
easily accessed by smaller banks, such as a discount-window-based facility, could also help, and 
I look forward to further analysis of the potential benefits and costs of these various tools. 
December 18–19, 2018
45 of 242


 
 
 
These “ceiling tools” could also smooth out our transition to a substantially smaller 
balance sheet, and they could give us greater comfort to probe further along the demand curve 
for reserves—reducing the chance that we stop shrinking our balance sheet too soon.  We will, of 
course, slow and eventually stop the normalization process as we approach reserves scarcity or, 
more accurately, approach the lowest level of abundance that we can achieve.  Along the way, 
I’d like to resist for as long as possible—as I suspect many would—the temptation to use the 
pace of redemptions as an active tool, because pressures on money market rates may turn out to 
be temporary.  Doing so could pose communications challenges, in view of our “gradual and 
predictable” mantra for the redemptions process.  Of course, in real time, it may be very difficult 
to know whether scarcity is fleeting or permanent, and I’d be prepared to see some volatility as 
the balance sheet declines.  I’d rather see that volatility show up through varying uptake in a 
ceiling facility rather than through federal funds volatility. 
I am, like some others, skeptical of the idea of widening the target range, because of what 
I think the staff has landed on—which is the communications difficulties.  As you try to explain 
that to yourself, you can imagine there’s a lot of grounds for confusion by the public about why 
the ON RRP rate is now out of the range and what is the range—it could be confusing.  Like 
many of us, I hope that banks’ demand for reserves will be even smaller than suggested by 
current estimates, and I’d be interested in additional staff work on what we all can do to further 
reduce that demand, like creating a facility to make it easier for banks to monetize their Treasury 
holdings rapidly.  I, like others, see substantial public good in our nonreserve liabilities, and I am 
skeptical that there’s much room for reducing them. 
On the question of the composition of the balance sheet over the long run, once the 
balance sheet reaches a “new normal,” I like the idea of having very gradual sales that reduce our 
December 18–19, 2018
46 of 242


 
 
 
MBS holdings.  It probably goes without saying that any such program would need to be 
carefully rolled out and involve only small quantities, at least at the start.  As for our Treasury 
security holdings, I would favor the largest possible allocation to bills, as this would maximize 
our policy space for a maturity extension program and other Operation Twists.  As I mentioned 
and as I know others have, it’s really important that we find every scrap of policy space we can.  
The memo used a 40 percent allocation to bills as a placeholder.  I didn’t sense that you saw that 
as a really hard limit, and I’d like to know how much higher we could go and what would be 
costs and benefits, although I think you dealt with that well. 
Those are my comments.  Thank you for your comments, and with permission from Mr. 
Clouse and others, I hereby call a 20-minute coffee break until three o’clock.  Thank you very 
much. 
[Coffee break] 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All right, everyone.  Welcome back.  Let’s go to our second 
agenda item, which is the Desk report.  Over to you, Simon. 
MR. POTTER.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With regard to the top-left panel of 
your first exhibit, declines in interest rates and risk asset prices have been notable 
over the intermeeting period, as shown in the left column.  While U.S. equity markets 
continued to decline this period, interest rates have fallen, credit spreads have 
widened, and the market-implied path of the policy rate has shifted lower.  This 
pattern reflects a broader risk-negative sentiment that some have characterized as 
reflecting heightened downside risks to the global economic outlook.  The pattern of 
price moves is noticeably different from that observed at the time of the November 
meeting, shown in the middle column.  Recall that, in November, I reported that the 
volatility exhibited in the U.S. equity market was largely driven by increased 
downside risks to corporate earnings growth and the valuation effect of the sharp 
increase in yields in early October, which was in part a reaction to strong U.S. 
economic data.  
The most notable moves over the period were seen as in reaction to developments 
in U.S.–China relations—seen by many as the major determinant of the direction of 
risk sentiment—and Federal Reserve communications, which led to substantial moves 
 
2 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
December 18–19, 2018
47 of 242


 
 
 
in interest rates.  Specifically, evolving interpretations of the G-20 agreement reached 
between Presidents Trump and Xi, aggravated by the arrest of a senior Chinese 
technology executive in Canada, drove significant volatility in the S&P 500 over the 
period, shown by the red line in the top-right panel. 
With respect to the outlook for monetary policy, comments by the Chairman and 
by Governor Clarida on proximity to the neutral rate, as well as a perceived increase 
in risks to the global outlook, drove declines in short-dated Treasury yields, shown in 
the blue line, and in the market-implied path of the policy rate.  Recall that that is in 
contrast to some FOMC communications that had pushed rates higher during the 
November intermeeting period. 
Declines in Treasury yields over the period were notable across tenors, and the 
curve flattened.  The intermediate part of the curve—specifically, between the 3- and 
5-year Treasury yields—also inverted very slightly, as shown in the red line in the 
middle-left panel.  While some equity market contacts cited the inversion as adding to 
negative sentiment and contributing to equity market weakness, contacts in the 
Treasury securities market generally downplayed the importance of the inversion of 
this specific part of the curve, preferring to look at the difference between the 2-year 
and 10-year yields or 3-month bill and 10-year yields, shown as the blue lines, for 
more meaningful signals of potentially weaker U.S. real GDP growth ahead.  These 
segments of the curve did not invert, but they flattened notably, with the respective 
spreads narrowing to 15 and 47 basis points. 
A substantial portion of the decline in long-dated nominal Treasury yields, shown 
in the middle-right panel, has been in TIPS-implied breakeven rates of inflation, 
shown as the light blue lines. While breakevens often tend to be sensitive to broader 
risk appetite, the narrowing was likely driven in part by the sharp drop in oil prices 
across the futures curve.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, front-month oil futures 
fell about 16 percent over the intermeeting period and are now down by around 
30 percent since early October.  Contacts continued to attribute the decline in oil 
prices to a sharp increase in global supply in recent months and a somewhat more 
gradual than expected implementation of Iran sanctions; however, some speculate 
that the moves could also be signaling downside risks to demand due to a potentially 
weaker global growth outlook. 
Investment-grade and high-yield corporate credit spreads widened notably over 
the period, as shown in the bottom-right panel.  In contrast to the narrative that 
applied to the previous intermeeting period, some have pointed to this widening as a 
reflection of investor concern over the U.S. real GDP growth outlook.  High-yield 
spreads widened by roughly 90 basis points, with triple-C-rated bonds widening to a 
much greater extent, indicating that investors are demanding higher compensation for 
credit risk.  Some of the widening in high-yield has been driven by energy companies, 
affected by the decline in oil prices. 
The risks associated with the triple-B segment of the investment-grade market 
continue to garner particular attention.  This segment has grown nearly fourfold to 
December 18–19, 2018
48 of 242


 
 
 
$3 trillion over the past decade and now comprises about 50 percent of outstanding 
investment-grade debt, as shown by the dark blue area of the top-left panel of your 
second exhibit.  Over the intermeeting period, two large firms, GE and Pacific Gas 
and Electric, exhibited substantial spread-widening in response to company-specific 
news.  While the combined debt of these two firms represents only a small fraction of 
total investment-grade debt outstanding, the developments have focused credit market 
investors on “fallen angel” risks—that is, the potential for substantial dislocations in 
credit markets in the event of more widespread downgrades to triple-B-rated firms.  
This dislocation could arise as funds with mandates precluding them from holding 
sub-investment-grade debt would be forced to sell these bonds. 
Levels of implied volatility are elevated across many markets, especially relative 
to the summer, as shown in the top-right panel.  In addition to the aforementioned 
sensitivity to U.S.–China relations, FOMC communications, and vulnerabilities in 
U.S. corporate markets, contacts also see both Brexit and the situation in Italy—as 
well as emerging political concerns in France and Germany—as posing important 
risks to global financial markets.  
While these various concerns had a notable effect on financial markets, U.S. 
economic data have continued to come in broadly in line with expectations, and Desk 
survey respondents’ economic growth forecasts still point to relatively strong growth.  
Furthermore, the likelihood assigned by respondents to the United States entering a 
recession in the near future is little changed from the previous survey.  The middle-
left panel shows the distribution of responses to the Desk’s survey on the probability 
of when the United States will first enter a recession.  Responses in the December 
survey, shown on the right-hand side in dark blue, are quite similar to those in the 
November survey, shown in light blue, and indicate an average cumulative perceived 
probability of entering a recession by end-2021 of around 70 percent. 
In contrast to the U.S. picture, European data have continued to come in weaker 
than expected.  That said, the ECB last week officially announced an end to its net 
purchases of public- and private-sector debt at the end of this month while continuing 
to reinvest principal payments for an extended period after the first rate increase.  The 
middle-right panel shows changes in securities held by the ECB in dark blue, the 
Bank of Japan in light blue, and the Federal Reserve in red.  With the ECB no longer 
increasing the size of its balance sheet, the Bank of Japan slowing down the pace of 
its JGB purchases, and the projected runoff in the SOMA portfolio, the total monthly 
change in securities held in aggregate, shown as the black line, has turned negative 
and is projected to decline further in coming months.  A number of Desk contacts 
have cited this deceleration and decline in total assets held on global central bank 
balance sheets as exacerbating market volatility associated with rising risks to the 
outlook. 
Amid the sharp swings in asset prices over the period and the attention to FOMC 
communications, the market-implied path of policy as well as the PDF-implied means 
in the Desk’s surveys shifted lower, as shown in the bottom-left panel.  Market 
participants’ shifting views on future FOMC policy over the period suggests that 
December 18–19, 2018
49 of 242


 
 
 
markets will be very sensitive to the rate decision and communications coming out of 
this meeting.  According to the Desk survey, the probability assigned by respondents 
to a rate increase at this meeting was 79 percent—lower than that seen ahead of 
recent meetings at which the Committee had increased the target range.  We could 
therefore observe some market reaction even if rates are increased, as nearly all 
contacts expect at this meeting.  
Respondents also expect policy rate projections in the SEP to shift lower, with the 
median “dot” expected to show two 25 basis point rate increases in 2019, with one 
final increase in 2020, shown as the blue circles in the bottom-right panel.  The 
expected changes to the median dots are of roughly similar magnitude to those 
observed in respondents’ own modal expectations of the path of the target range from 
September to December, shown as the red diamonds; however, many of our 
respondents expect a decline in the policy rate in 2021, even with a continued 
expansion. 
On the statement, many survey respondents expect the Committee to alter or 
remove the language referencing “further gradual increases,” with several instead 
expecting the inclusion of text emphasizing the data-dependent nature of future 
monetary policy.  Many respondents also expect the Chairman to emphasize in his 
press conference the data dependence of the Committee’s decisions.  I will now turn 
the briefing over to Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Simon.  Starting on your third exhibit, I’ll begin with a 
discussion of money markets over the intermeeting period and then turn to updates on 
the SOMA portfolio and Desk operations. 
As shown in the top-left panel, the effective federal funds rate printed at, or just 
1 basis point below, the level of IOER throughout the intermeeting period.  Notably, 
the risk factors we outlined in the November briefing as having the potential to put 
further upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate—such as decreases in 
FHLB lending or changes in trading dynamics once the effective rate reached 
IOER—did not materialize. 
Although term money market rates rose relative to OIS, as shown by the LIBOR–
OIS spread in red in the top-right panel, this does not appear to have added upward 
pressure to rates paid by banks borrowing in the federal funds market to enhance their 
LCR—something we also highlighted at the November meeting as a potential risk for 
further upward pressure on the effective rate. 
Indeed, ahead of year-end, term rates have not increased as much as some market 
participants had anticipated.  This is reportedly due to better preparation and more 
prefunding activity compared with last year.  In addition, cross-currency swap bases 
spanning year-end have narrowed recently, as shown by the light and dark blue lines.  
Contacts have pointed to the combination of these factors as indicating that year-end 
pressures are likely to be more moderate. 
December 18–19, 2018
50 of 242


 
 
 
While trading dynamics in the federal funds market were relatively stable, 
Treasury repo rates increased slightly on average.  As shown in the middle-left panel, 
the SOFR and TGCR printed on some days 10 to 15 basis points above IOER and 
occasionally above the top of the federal funds rate target range. 
Repo rates continue to be affected by the Treasury’s supply of securities, with 
Treasury bills outstanding increasing by $175 billion in the fourth quarter and 
peaking in early December, as shown in the middle-right panel.  However, the 
effect—like the episode in July and August—was more moderate than in the first 
quarter of this year.  This might be because the increase in supply was on a smaller 
scale, and came to the market more gradually, than was the case earlier in the year. 
Furthermore, as illustrated in the bottom-left panel, net dealer inventories of 
Treasury securities have also increased to a new high.  Dealer inventories are mostly 
funded through the repo market, which is another way in which the supply of 
Treasury securities tends to affect repo rates. 
With some of the FHLBs reportedly reaching their respective counterparty limits 
in repo markets, we did not see further reallocation by FHLBs from federal funds to 
repo following the rise in repo rates this period.  However, we did see a few banks 
that had large reserve holdings reallocate excess reserve balances into repo 
investments.  As Treasury repo investments are considered a Level 1 HQLA asset and 
yield a return greater than IOER now, market participants have reported more interest 
on the part of banks to lend funds currently held as reserve balances into various 
segments of the repo market, in order to capture the extra return.  This activity, shown 
in the bottom-right panel, is primarily concentrated in a few large banks and has 
reportedly been a factor holding back further sustained increases in repo rates 
stemming from Treasury security supply and dealer inventory pressures.  This is 
comforting in that banks have shown a willingness to lend excess reserves when 
secured money market rates have risen to levels moderately above IOER. 
As Patricia discussed earlier, we will continue to monitor bank lending in repo as 
one potential indicator of abundance of reserves.  In other words, a reduced 
willingness of banks to deploy their excess reserves into repo when the opportunities 
are attractive may indicate that these banks are nearing their minimum comfortable 
reserve levels and would no longer mitigate upward pressure on repo rates. 
As we look ahead, respondents to the Desk surveys were asked to provide their 
expectations of money market rate spreads following FOMC meetings through the 
end of 2019.  The results are summarized in the top panel of your fourth exhibit. 
With respect to the spread between the top of the target range and IOER, shown 
as the dark gray dash, median expectations are consistent with a technical adjustment 
of 5 basis points at this meeting and a further 5 basis point technical adjustment by 
mid-2019.  Expectations regarding the timing of this third technical adjustment 
moved forward slightly, from the second half of 2019 to the end of the second 
quarter.  As we noted in November, the staff expects that a 5 basis point technical 
December 18–19, 2018
51 of 242


 
 
 
adjustment to IOER at this meeting would pass through approximately one-for-one to 
market rates. 
As we look further out, median expectations are for the effective federal funds 
rate, represented by the dark blue diamonds, to trade about 5 basis points above IOER 
by December 2019 and around 10 basis points below the top of the range, little 
changed from the November survey.  The median IOER–OBFR spread expectation 
closely tracks the IOER–effective federal funds rate spread through the end of next 
year. 
Reflecting higher repo rates over the intermeeting period, respondents’ median 
expectation regarding the Tri-Party General Collateral Rate, relative to other money 
market rates, increased slightly.  As you can see, the TGCR, shown as the pink 
diamonds, is expected to be roughly 4 to 10 basis points above IOER but within the 
Committee’s target range for the federal funds rate. 
Respondents were also asked about their expectations regarding the size and 
composition of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, on average, in 2025, conditional on 
not moving to the effective lower bound.  The median respondent expected the 
balance sheet to average around $4 trillion in 2025, roughly $370 billion larger than 
the median forecast of the June 2018 survey, with the interquartile range of responses 
running from $3.6 trillion to $4.3 trillion. 
With respect to the liability side of the balance sheet, as shown in the middle-left 
panel, the median expected level of reserve balances was $1.1 trillion—just a touch 
higher than the estimate the staff provided in a memo before the November meeting.  
Survey responses also assumed higher levels of currency, which were mostly offset 
by a slightly smaller foreign RP pool and overnight RRP estimates.  As shown in the 
middle-right panel, the lower overnight RRP estimate is consistent with recent 
overnight RRP take-up, which remained low, averaging $4.5 billion per day over the 
intermeeting period. 
As usual, the Desk will use these updated expectations, along with the December 
interest rate forecasts given in the surveys, as inputs into the balance sheet projections 
we release in the annual report on open market operations in the second quarter of 
next year.  
The bottom-left panel shows the preliminary results for projected SOMA holdings 
under alternative liabilities scenarios.  Under the path implied by the median 
December survey results, shown by the solid dark blue line, the portfolio normalizes 
in the first quarter of 2020, slightly earlier and to a slightly larger size than implied by 
the staff Tealbook profile.  The projected sizes under the smaller and larger 
aggregate-liabilities scenarios are now closer to the median than they were in June. 
With regard to recent developments in the SOMA portfolio, since the phase-in of 
maximum redemption caps in October, caps for Treasury securities have been binding 
only in November, while caps for MBS have not been binding.  However, in light of 
December 18–19, 2018
52 of 242


 
 
 
the declines in U.S. Treasury yields over the intermeeting period, it is worth noting 
that the cap on MBS redemptions could become binding again if there were a further 
decline in long-term interest rates. 
As an illustrative example,  under a scenario of a 50 basis point downward shock 
to market-implied interest rates, staff forecasts suggest the cap would once again bind 
in the summers of 2019 and 2020, concurrent with the pickup in seasonal turnover.  
This is shown by the pink bars breaching the red line in the bottom-right panel. 
With regard to other operational updates, the Desk recently circulated a memo 
providing an overview of the Desk’s operational readiness framework and the current 
readiness status of SOMA operations.  The memo also provided advance notice of all 
small-value exercises planned for 2019.  Through these efforts over the course of the 
year, we have identified and addressed a number of opportunities for enhancing both 
our readiness as well as the readiness of our counterparties—highlighting the value of 
conducting such tests.  We will continue at each FOMC meeting to provide updates 
on the results pertaining to the previous period and inform you of the upcoming 
exercises. 
As shown in the appendix, during the intermeeting period, the Desk conducted six 
types of small-value exercises under the domestic authorization and two under the 
foreign authorization.  Over the upcoming intermeeting period, we plan to conduct 
only one type of small-value exercise, outright MBS TBA purchases. 
In looking ahead to the January meeting and the annual review of the 
Committee’s authorizations for domestic open market operations and foreign 
currency transactions, the staff identified some small changes for your consideration 
related to the governance over counterparties as well as a minor item related to limits 
on small-value exercises.  We plan to deliver a memo in the weeks before the January 
meeting to describe these recommendations.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That 
concludes our prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Are there any questions for Simon or Lorie?  [No 
response]  While you think about that, I have one.  In panel 23—Lorie, did I hear you say that, 
essentially, at today’s longer-term Treasury rates, the caps are not binding? 
MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  So no binding-ness.  So it would take—this is 50 basis points 
from today’s level, not from a forecast. 
MR. POTTER.  It’s 43.  It’s 282 right now.  We did this on Friday. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Say again? 
December 18–19, 2018
53 of 242


 
 
 
MR. POTTER.  We’re 43 basis points away from this right now. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  I see. 
MR. POTTER.  The Treasury 10-year is just above 280, not 289. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Okay.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One quick question, Simon, regarding 
your panel 10, exhibit 2, looking at the quantitative easing balance sheets of central banks around 
the world.  I’m just curious—I think this goes back to the fundamental view of stock versus flow 
versus path.  I mean, I think the Committee did an outstanding job communicating what our path 
is going to be on the roll-off, so I had always assumed that markets would probably see the end 
immediately.  I’m just curious, as you have observed QE on the way up, and now the gradual 
reduction, what do you read from the market signals?  Do you think this is the balance sheet 
runoff, or do you think it is just global economic slowdown?  And I know it’s hard to tell.  I’m 
just— 
MR. POTTER.  Let’s start with the basic problem.  The Ph.D. I have in economics means 
I wouldn’t believe this argument. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Okay.  [Laughter] 
MR. POTTER.  That’s a bit of a problem.  What seems to be the case is that a lot of 
people do believe it.  They believe that the way that QE worked was to put a floor under risk 
asset prices.  And what is happening right now is, the market is searching without that support 
provided by central banks to find the right level for those asset prices.  And there are many 
people who seem to believe that.  And I don’t think we can ignore the fact that this type of 
chart—which I think was featured earlier this week in a newspaper article— can have some 
effect on how people think about that.  But I find it hard, myself, to give you a mechanism. 
December 18–19, 2018
54 of 242


 
 
 
MR. KASHKARI.  Sure.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Further questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, we 
now need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations conducted since the November 
meeting.  Do I have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All those in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Thank you very much.  
Next, we’ll turn to a review of the economic and financial situation.  I’m turning it over to you, 
Andrew. 
MR. FIGURA.3  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the handout “Material for Staff 
Presentation on the Economic and Financial Situation.” 
Your first slide compares the December Tealbook forecast with the one in June—
the last time we gave you a chart show.  Now, as then, the ongoing tightening in the 
stance of monetary policy and slowly fading fiscal stimulus lead real GDP, shown in 
the top-left panel, to decelerate gradually over the medium term.  As in June, we 
project the unemployment rate, shown at the top right, to move lower next year but 
then flatten out in 2020.  The sharp fall in oil prices in recent months led to the one 
notable change in our forecast—a lower projected rate of total PCE inflation this year 
and next, shown in the bottom-left panel.  But we continue to project that some 
further tightening in resource utilization and a small increase in underlying inflation 
will lead to a modest step-up in core PCE inflation over the medium term. 
As shown in your next slide, the strengthening in the labor market over the past 
year has been widespread across race and ethnicity groups.  Over this time, most 
groups experienced falling unemployment rates and rising prime-age participation 
rates.  However, the persistent gaps between the different groups have remained. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will build on Eric Engen’s presentation at your 
previous meeting and consider some downside risks to our federal funds rate 
projection, the black line in the left panel of slide 3.  In the December Tealbook, the 
federal funds rate rises to 4.75 percent over the medium term, well above the median 
SEP path, the red line.  As described in the bullets to the right, to arrive at our 
projection, we start from the same place you do—namely, an inflation target of 
2 percent.  We then add a neutral real rate of 50 basis points.  We currently have 
output a little more than 2 percent above its potential level and expect that gap to 
widen over the projection period.  With a coefficient of 1 on the output gap in the 
Taylor ’99 rule that we use to specify the forecast’s setting of the federal funds rate, 
 
3 The materials used by Messrs. Figura and Erceg are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
December 18–19, 2018
55 of 242


 
 
 
it’s therefore not surprising that we get to a peak funds rate of 4.75 percent.  For us, the 
question is, “Why don’t you arrive at a similar path?”  As shown on your next slide, I 
consider two possible answers to that question, which I frame as risks to the staff 
projection. 
First, I consider the possibility that current resource utilization is significantly 
lower than the staff is estimating.  Second, even if the staff’s estimate of the current 
output gap is correct, it could be that the economy’s self-correcting forces when 
economic activity is well above its potential level are significantly stronger than the 
staff assumes and that, as a result, a reversion back to a zero output gap will require 
much less tightening of monetary policy than the staff believes. 
Your next slide considers the first possibility:  a near-zero output gap.  The staff’s 
current output gap estimate is similar to that using one of the state-space models that 
we maintain, shown in the black line in the left panel.  But uncertainty about the 
output gap is quite high, and the 90 percent confidence bands using our model—the 
light green shaded area—currently encompass zero. 
The table to the right explores one possible alternative configuration of slack 
margins in which the output gap is close to zero.  Specifically, I assume a slightly 
lower unemployment rate gap than in the Tealbook, line 3, and continued slack along 
the participation rate margin, line 4.  This leaves the gap for the employment-to-
population ratio—the combination of the unemployment and participation rate gaps—
close to zero, line 2.  With the employment–population gap close to zero, it seems 
reasonable to assume that the other gaps, line 5, are also close to zero.  In total, the 
alternative output gap is only slightly positive currently. 
Much of the difference between the Tealbook and the alternative output gaps lies 
in the participation rate margin—which your next two slides examine in more detail. 
With regard, first, to the staff’s view, as shown in the top-left panel, the staff 
estimate of the participation rate trend—the black line—has declined since 2007 as a 
result of both population aging—the light blue shaded area—and downward trends in 
the participation rates of some demographic groups—the darker shaded area labeled 
“Within-group component.” 
Staff views on the within-group component have been influenced by research, 
including at the Reserve Banks and the Board, suggesting that changes in technology 
and trade have reduced the returns to work, and the participation rates, of lower-skill 
individuals.  For example, the participation rate for prime-age individuals with a high 
school degree or less, the black line in the bottom-left panel, has declined much more 
than the participation rate of those with at least a bachelor’s degree, the red line, over 
the past two decades. 
In addition, recent research by Rob Valletta and Nathaniel Barlow of the San 
Francisco Fed uses changes in the share of routine manual-occupation jobs—which 
may have been particularly vulnerable to displacement due to trade or technology—to 
December 18–19, 2018
56 of 242


 
 
 
identify the effects of labor market polarization.  Their research shows that states with 
relatively large declines in routine manual work, the x-axis in the right panel, tended 
to also experience relatively large declines in prime-age participation, the y-axis.  As 
a result, Rob and Nathaniel estimate that labor market polarization led to a decline of 
1.3 percentage points in prime-age participation between 2000 and 2017, with about 
half of that decline occurring since 2007.  Analysis such as this has led the staff to 
conclude that the decline in participation rates of lower-skill workers is largely 
structural, not cyclical. 
It’s possible, however, that the depth and persistence of the Great Recession 
resulted in a much larger cyclical decline in participation than the staff assumes, and 
that the trend level of the participation rate is higher than the staff estimates and in 
line with the alternative participation rate trend described earlier and shown by the 
red line in the left panel. 
The behavior of the prime-age participation rate, shown in the left panel of your 
next exhibit, offers some support for this view.  Prime-age participation showed little 
evidence of a cyclical recovery until 2014, five years into the expansion, but has since 
then increased fairly robustly, especially for women, as shown in the red line.  The 
recovery’s long delay could mean that it is still incomplete. 
Further evidence in that direction comes from recent data on prime-age 
individuals out of the labor force because of a disability—the top-right panel.  Earlier 
in the economic expansion, many observers pointed to the upward trend in the 
number of these individuals as an indication that the decline in prime-age 
participation was structural, not cyclical.  However, since 2014, there has been a 
striking reversal in this trend—suggesting that this interpretation may have been 
incorrect. 
In addition, some evidence points to the possibility that many individuals 
currently outside the labor force could be drawn into employment.  As shown in the 
bottom-right panel, the number of new jobs filled by formerly unemployed 
individuals, the red line, has continued to decline recently, in line with the very low 
unemployment rate.  However, the number of new jobs filled by individuals coming 
from out of the labor force, the black line, remains quite high—suggesting continued 
ample supply along this margin. 
In sum, the possibility that the output gap is currently close to zero and that slack 
along the participation rate margin still exits, while not corresponding to our modal 
estimate, seems plausible.  Such an estimate, when combined with a belief that 
growth in aggregate supply and aggregate demand over the projection period will be 
balanced when the funds rate is near its longer-run neutral level, would likely 
generate an expected path of the federal funds rate of around 3 percent over the 
medium term and may be one reason that the staff’s path for the policy rate is above 
that of some other forecasters. 
December 18–19, 2018
57 of 242


 
 
 
The remaining slides examine the possibility that the economy’s self-correcting 
forces are stronger than the staff assumes.  In the staff projection, the output gap—the 
black line in the left panel—is projected to be at or above 2.5 percent for the next 
three years despite a funds rate that is quite restrictive, the right panel.  However, 
uncertainty about future output gaps is quite high, and a 90 percent confidence 
interval—the light blue shaded region in the left panel—includes zero by the middle 
of 2020. 
Your next slide examines some of the influences on the staff’s output gap 
forecast.  The staff believes that substantial momentum in aggregate demand will 
prevent a significant reduction in the output gap over the medium term.  As shown in 
the top-left panel, this momentum is due to a number of factors, including substantial 
fiscal stimulus through 2020, shown to the right; elevated consumer confidence, not 
shown; household wealth that has recently reached historical highs relative to income, 
the bottom-left panel; and accommodative financing for businesses and households, 
also not shown.  Finally, a relatively elevated personal saving rate, shown in the 
lower-right panel, suggests that ample room remains for consumers to spend out of 
current income. 
As shown on your next slide, however, an output gap approaching 3 percent 
suggests that there may also be sizable forces pushing the economy back toward a 
more sustainable level of activity.  To investigate this possibility, we condition the 
staff’s FRB/US model on the staff’s judgmental estimates of all aspects of economic 
activity in the current quarter, including the output gap, and then ask it to project the 
output gap forward.  In this simulation, there are assumed to be no shocks to the 
FRB/US model’s private aggregate demand or financial equations after this year.  But 
the FRB/US model has a very rich dynamic structure that propagates forward the 
shocks received until now. 
As shown by the red line in the top-left panel, this simulation projects a 
considerably more rapid reversion of the output gap to zero over the medium term 
than the staff’s, despite a funds rate path that is below the staff’s, the right panel.  In 
particular, the FRB/US model projects that the positive effects of aggregate spending, 
monetary policy, and risk-spread shocks will fade or reverse relatively quickly over 
the medium term.  Also of note is that equity prices decline 15 percent in this 
simulation, and GDP growth is close to 1 percent over the medium term. 
To step back from the details of any particular model:   What fundamental forces 
might be pushing activity back toward more sustainable levels?  With resource 
utilization quite tight, the probability of hitting constraints along some margin of 
supply—in particular in the labor market—appears relatively high.  For example, as 
shown by the black line in the lower-left panel, data obtained from the JOLTS survey 
suggest that the time it takes employers to fill job vacancies is now well above 
readings at prior cyclical peaks.  And responses given in the most recent Beige Book 
survey, indicated in the red line, show a sharp increase in the share of employers 
responding that they have had difficulty hiring because they cannot find qualified 
workers. 
December 18–19, 2018
58 of 242


 
 
 
Although monthly employment gains thus far suggest little imprint of such 
constraints, as we go forward it’s possible that they will limit output growth by more 
than we assume.  Furthermore, increasing signs that resource constraints will hamper 
future growth may lead financial markets, businesses, and households to downgrade 
their economic outlooks, resulting in weaker asset prices, credit supply, household 
and business sentiment, and aggregate spending.  For example, in the staff projection, 
an acceleration in labor costs along with a deceleration in demand leads to a net 
decline in domestic corporate profits, the right panel, over the medium term.  The 
realization of this outcome may have greater effects on equity prices and business 
hiring and investment than the staff assumes. 
In sum, in the staff projection we make the implicit assumption that monetary 
policy will need to provide much of the correcting force necessary to bring activity 
back to a sustainable level.  But it is certainly possible that the economy’s own self-
correcting forces are stronger, and will be activated sooner, than the staff assumes.  If 
so, the funds rate path will likely be lower than the staff currently projects.  Chris will 
now continue our presentation. 
MR. ERCEG.  Sharply falling oil prices, weaker-than-expected data, and 
tightening financial conditions have raised widespread concerns about the health of 
foreign economies.  We’ve been revising down our outlook for growth abroad but are 
not anticipating a sharp further slowdown.  Looking ahead, we expect that the foreign 
economies will grow at 2.5 to 2.75 percent per year, close to our estimate of potential.  
Even so, these economies face formidable downside risks and have limited policy 
space. 
As discussed on the next page, while incoming data from abroad have been 
disappointing, they still seem consistent with continued moderate expansion.  A staff 
index of foreign economic conditions utilizes a broad set of economic indicators to 
gauge the health of foreign economies—including retail sales, industrial production, 
GDP growth, and new export orders.  This index co-moves strongly with the business 
cycle and drops sharply at the onset of foreign recessions.  Although the index has 
dipped from its 2017 peak, it is near the midpoint of its range—a level typically 
associated with solid near-trend real GDP growth and comfortably above levels 
usually associated with recession.  That said, there are areas of concern, including the 
euro area.  Though euro-area PMIs remain in expansionary territory—consistent with 
our forecast that the euro area will resume growing near potential next year—GDP 
nearly stalled in the third quarter.  More generally, we recognize that recessions are 
hard to predict—and there’s probably no surer way to ensure a recession does occur 
than to issue a clean bill of health—but at least the data aren’t screaming that a 
foreign slowdown is imminent. 
As shown on the next page, while financial conditions have tightened in both 
AFEs and EMEs since September, we see the drag as likely to be quite moderate.  To 
understand why, it’s helpful to take a “look under the hood” of our forecasting 
machinery.  Staff indexes of financial stress, such as that for the AFEs shown in the 
panel—the red line—have moved up as corporate bond spreads and equity market 
December 18–19, 2018
59 of 242


 
 
 
volatility—key components of the indexes—have increased.  However, the rise is 
only modest—far less than in 2016.  The right panel shows the effects on output of 
major AFEs derived from a structural VAR that includes these country-specific 
financial stress indexes and where the shock to financial stress is scaled to equal the 
surprise in the index between the September and December Tealbooks.  As seen in 
the right panel, the effects on GDP—while material—are still fairly moderate, and 
thus we have made only a small adjustment to the outlook. 
As discussed on the next page, a much sharper increase in stress would be quite 
challenging for AFE central banks considering that, even in a relatively normal 
financial environment, they likely will have to keep policy rates near zero—see the 
lower-left panel—just to expand at their modest potential growth rates.  By 
implication, real interest rates in the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom are 
expected to remain in significantly negative territory through 2020 before gradually 
edging up to a long-run level of roughly 0 to 1 percent—in line with the estimate of 
long-run r* of the Holston-Laubach-Williams model in the middle panel.  Because 
short-run r* appears very low, monetary policy would have limited ability to offset 
any shocks that cause a persistent tightening of financial conditions.  In addition, high 
government debt would likely constrain fiscal policy.  This limited policy space 
leaves these economies highly vulnerable to a “cocktail of risks” that I’ll consider in 
your next slides. 
One key risk is Brexit.  We continue to assume that the United Kingdom and the 
EU will cobble together a plan for an orderly transition to a sustained close economic 
partnership post-Brexit.  However, the U.K. government faces huge challenges in 
gaining support for the arrangement it worked out with the EU—as exemplified by 
last week’s cancellation of a parliamentary vote on the plan and subsequent challenge 
to Prime Minister May’s party leadership. 
The timetable for negotiations is running out, and, if the government’s plan is not 
approved, alternative outcomes include a second referendum on Brexit or even a 
spectacular “no deal” Brexit that would catapult the U.K. from the EU on March 29.  
The latter outcome would likely roil global financial markets and plunge the U.K. 
into a recession. 
Italy’s standoff with the EU, the subject of your next chart, is another salient 
downside risk.  The Italian government has recently indicated a willingness to aim for 
a smaller budget deficit, and this more conciliatory approach has led to some easing 
in sovereign risks spreads.  However, financial conditions remain tight and are 
weighing on Italy’s economy, with output falling in the third quarter.  A prolonged 
growth slowdown could push government debt to frightening levels—as suggested by 
the scenario in the right panel—and increase tensions with the EU.  Slow growth, 
higher credit spreads, and heightened financial stresses would also weigh on Italy’s 
already weak banking sector.  Although we expect that the Italian government and the 
EU will be able to keep the situation contained, there remains a significant risk of 
escalation into a full-blown financial crisis. 
December 18–19, 2018
60 of 242


 
 
 
On the next page, I’m going to skip over a few remaining items on our laundry 
list of perennial risks, including a China hard landing and financial crises in 
vulnerable emerging market economies.  But I note that Latin America continues to 
look fragile, including because of greater uncertainties in Mexico:  Mexico’s new 
populist government has canceled a major airport project and slowed privatization in 
the oil sector, signaling less market-friendly policies. 
And we also remain concerned about trade policies, discussed on your next page.  
As shown on the bottom left, worries about trade policy have bounced back to near-
peak levels.  As shown by the table on the right, these worries appear to be mainly 
about a future heightening of trade tensions, as the effects of trade policies 
implemented thus far are quite small:  The level of U.S. real GDP is depressed about 
0.2 percent by the end of next year, line 7, and core consumer prices are 0.1 to 
0.2 percent higher.  The Administration’s highly visible trade negotiations with China 
have won some concessions, including China’s pledge to buy more U.S. agricultural 
and energy goods and the lifting of some of China’s retaliatory tariffs imposed this 
summer.  However, the Administration is pressing for rapid progress in opening 
China’s markets and in the protection of intellectual property, and it is uncertain 
whether the negotiations will succeed in taking further sharp tariff hikes off the table. 
Arrangements with Canada and Mexico represent another flashpoint for trade 
tensions, with the Administration suggesting it might pull the plug on NAFTA to 
improve the chances of the Congress approving the USMCA, NAFTA’s successor.  
We expect the USMCA will pass following a bumpy legislative process, but its 
passage is not assured. 
As discussed on the next page, considering that new tariffs have only been 
implemented on about one-eighth of merchandise imports, it is not surprising that 
their effects are not apparent in overall trade numbers.  Even so, recent data suggest 
tariffs may be having some effects on trade flows.  While the aggregate value of 
imports from China has continued to expand markedly in recent months, this may 
reflect some degree of front running.  In particular, the value of imports on which 10 
percent tariffs were applied in late September—the red dotted line—rose faster than 
nontariffed goods until that time—the black line—consistent with the story that 
buyers were advancing purchases due to concern that tariffs would be imposed, 
whereas imports of goods already tariffed at 25 percent, perceived as a likely 
maximum, have started to nosedive—the blue dotted line.  The right panel shows 
U.S. exports to China have fallen sharply, driven by especially sharp declines in 
agricultural exports—an area in which China imposed high retaliatory tariffs. 
The next slide indicates that there is some tentative evidence that tariffs may be 
boosting prices.  The left panel shows that import prices on goods from China—
which are measured pretariff and hence would be expected to fall if Chinese 
producers were lowering their markups—have been flat through October, the last 
observation.  This suggests that the tariff hikes are passing through to U.S. buyers, but 
it is very unclear whether those hikes will be absorbed by U.S. importers, downstream 
producers, or final consumers.  New research by my R&S colleague Aaron Flaaen 
December 18–19, 2018
61 of 242


 
 
 
uses the input–output tables to account for sectoral linkages in the use of imported 
inputs and finds—see the lower-right panel—that producer prices have risen 
somewhat faster in U.S. manufacturing sectors that depend more heavily on imported 
goods hit by the recent tariffs.  But it’s clearly difficult to estimate the effects with 
much precision. 
As considered in the next slide, while the effects of tariffs imposed thus far likely 
have had only small effects on consumer prices, much larger tariff hikes could 
confront policymakers with a tradeoff between containing inflation and supporting 
output.  The tradeoff may well depend on whether tariffs are imposed mainly on final 
consumption goods or on capital goods and intermediate inputs, as it’s at least 
plausible that tariffs on imported inputs have smaller effects on consumer price 
inflation than tariffs on final consumer goods.  Most of the recent tariffs applied by 
the United States to China—75 to 80 percent according to a Peterson Institute study 
by Bown and others, seen in the pie chart—have been on capital and intermediate 
goods. 
To explore this, your next slide considers a simulation of the staff’s SIGMA 
model that compares the imposition of a broad-based unilateral tariff on all imports—
final consumer goods as well as capital goods in the model—with a tariff levied 
exclusively on capital goods.  The broad-based tariff boosts consumer price inflation 
markedly, the black line, reflecting the feature that the higher tax on imported 
consumption goods is only partly offset by dollar appreciation.  By contrast, the tariff 
levied exclusively on capital goods reduces inflation as the dollar appreciation lowers 
the price of consumer imports.  Inflation, the red line, remains restrained thereafter 
because real wages decline substantially; in effect, firms force their employees to bear 
the tax rather than their customers.  Monetary policy tightens in response to the 
broad-based tariff increase, but it eases a bit if tariffs are levied only on capital goods. 
Tariff hikes appear to have had only muted effects on U.S. consumer price 
inflation so far.  However, if future tariffs on China or other countries target a larger 
share of consumer imports, we may see more sizable effects on consumer prices, and 
the issue of possible tradeoffs could become more material.  Thank you.  Michele will 
now continue the presentation. 
MR. CAVALLO.4  Thank you, Chris.  I will be referring to the packet labeled 
“Material for Briefing on Summary of Economic Projections.”  To summarize, many 
of you marked down slightly your projections for real GDP growth and inflation in 
the near term.  In addition, the median path of the federal funds rate is now a little 
flatter than in your September projections.  On balance, your assessments of the 
uncertainty and risks surrounding your projections are little changed. 
Exhibit 1 summarizes your economic projections, which are conditional on your 
individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.  As shown in the top panel, 
the medians of your projections for real GDP growth this year and in 2019 have been 
 
4 The materials used by Mr. Cavallo are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
December 18–19, 2018
62 of 242


 
 
 
trimmed slightly, with several of you mentioning tighter financial conditions or a 
softer global economic outlook as factors behind your downward revisions.  Most of 
you continue to expect real GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, 
with the median growth rate in 2021 now a touch below the median estimate of its 
longer-run rate.  As shown in the second panel, the median of your projections for the 
unemployment rate falls from 3.7 percent in 2018 to 3.5 percent next year, before 
edging back up in 2020 and 2021.  Most of you continue to project that the 
unemployment rate in 2021 will still be well below your individual estimates of its 
longer-run level.  As you can see in the lower panels, the medians of your projections 
for both headline and core inflation this year and in 2019 are a bit lower than in 
September.  Some of you pointed to softer incoming data or recent declines in oil 
prices as reasons for shaving your projections for inflation in the near term.  All of 
you project that headline inflation will be in a range from 2 to 2.3 percent in 2020 and 
2021. 
Exhibit 2 reports your assessments of the appropriate path of the federal funds 
rate.  The median of your projections, indicated by the red horizontal lines in the top 
panel, stands at 2.4 percent at the end of this year and 2.9 percent in 2019, consistent 
with a 25 basis point increase at this meeting and two more next year.  Compared 
with your September projections, the median federal funds rate is unchanged at the 
end of 2018 but is 25 basis points lower after that.  Some of you cited a weaker near-
term trajectory for economic growth or a muted response of inflation to tight labor 
market conditions as factors contributing to the downward revisions in your 
assessments of the appropriate path of the policy rate.  The vast majority of you judge 
that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in 2020 and 2021 will be above 
your individual assessments of its longer-run level; but many of you narrowed the 
extent of this overshooting. 
The red diamonds and green squares in exhibit 2 show the median prescriptions 
for the federal funds rate using non-inertial and inertial versions of the Taylor (1999) 
rule, respectively, that take as key inputs your individual projections for core 
inflation, the unemployment gap, and the longer-run federal funds rate.  As in the 
past, the rates prescribed by the non-inertial Taylor rule are notably higher than your 
projections, reach a peak earlier, and then taper slowly toward the longer-run values; 
by construction, the prescribed paths under the inertial Taylor rule start out much 
closer to your projected levels, but the gap widens steadily over the projection period.  
The difference between the rule prescriptions and your individual assessments of the 
appropriate path suggests that, with inflation near your objective, you do not see a 
need for responding to the projected unemployment gaps as aggressively as the 
Taylor (1999) rules would call for. 
The panels of exhibit 3 present your judgments about the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your projections.  As shown in the left panels, most of you continue to 
view the uncertainty attached to your projections as broadly similar to the average 
over the past 20 years.  As illustrated in the right panels, most of you generally judged 
the risks to the outlook as balanced.  Two more of you now see the risks to real GDP 
growth as weighted to the downside.  In addition, one fewer of you now views the 
December 18–19, 2018
63 of 242


 
 
 
risks to inflation as weighted to the upside.  In your narratives, trade tensions as well 
as developments abroad were mentioned as sources of uncertainty or downsi.de risk 
to the growth outlook.  For the inflation outlook, the effects of trade restrictions were 
cited as upside risks and lower energy prices and the stronger dollar as downside 
risks.  Thank you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be happy to 
respond to your questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks very much.  Any questions for the staff?  President 
Rosengren.  
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you very much for the presentation highlighting the 
difference between the December Tealbook and the September SEP.  I wonder if some of the 
differences between the two could be related to the fact that the Tealbook projection associates 
very low costs with being well beyond full employment. 
You don’t have inflation going up very much at all, and you don’t show a very high 
probability of going into a recession.  One implication of that is that the Committee might be 
much more tolerant of a much longer time period to get back to full employment than you may 
be using.  Is that a possible alternative explanation for why the SEP and the Tealbook diverge so 
much? 
MR. FIGURA.  I think so.  It’s true that the December Tealbook has inflation basically at 
2 percent over the medium term, which is right at your target.  So that’s not telling you that you 
need to do very much in response to that. 
We do have an output gap that approaches 3 percent—which is pretty high.  There are 
possibilities that you may want to avoid having a high output gap because it might stimulate, or 
be reflective of, financial imbalances in the economy that could be harmful later on.  So I think, 
conditional on the Committee not being worried about those financial imbalances that might be 
caused or reflected by an output gap, then I guess with just inflation not being very high— 
December 18–19, 2018
64 of 242


 
 
 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  But just to follow up, when we look at the probability of a 
recession, the staff has not shown an elevated probability of a recession, which would 
presumably be reflected if we had much higher financial stability risk.  So at least one 
implication is, if there is very low cost to being beyond full employment, then you have high 
willingness to tolerate that for a long period of time and are very patient in getting back. 
So there is somewhat of a cost-benefit calculation.  Maybe being at 3.1 percent implies an 
extremely long period of time before you get back to full employment.  But if there is no cost to 
it, a very extended period of time of having the output gap being positive may not be as 
problematic.  It’s an alternative hypothesis regarding why the SEP and staff forecasts diverge. 
MR. WILCOX.  I’m a little slow on the uptake, but I’m not following the logic.  We have 
a larger unemployment rate gap for longer than you do.  And I’m behind a step in terms of 
understanding why that implies that the mythical median Committee participant would perceive 
a lower cost to running the economy a little “hot.” 
MR. ROSENGREN.  We don’t forecast out beyond 3 years.  Say we’re willing to wait 
15 years to get back to full employment because we view the costs as being so low.  You’re not 
assuming in your forecast that you’re willing to wait 15 years to close that gap, right?  You’re 
assuming a much shorter period—you’re assuming that we want to get back to what our estimate 
of full employment is.  So— 
MR. WILCOX.  That’s true.  It’s a little hard to divine the inner logic of the SEP 
forecast, as it’s a median.  But an alternative interpretation—which I think squares with the facts 
at least as well as your rendition does—is that you all have a lower natural rate of 
unemployment.  So you have a smaller unemployment rate gap.  You have the unemployment 
rate never getting quite as low as we have it.  So, again, that suggests that you have less pressure 
December 18–19, 2018
65 of 242


 
 
 
in the economy than we do.  So, it’s true, over the next three years we have the economy 
operating further beyond its potential for longer.  But I don’t know.  I’m not convinced that your 
narrative squares. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  David, can I just check my recollection—I seem to recall from 
the September meeting, though, that in the baseline forecast, the staff forecast, we don’t get back 
to the natural rate of unemployment for many years—8 to 10 years, I think he said. 
MR. WILCOX.  That’s right.  And because we have inflation so exceedingly well 
anchored—I mean, it’s not literally nailed to 2 percent, but it’s pretty darn sluggish in responding 
to the economy being in high-pressure mode.  You all don’t incur a lot of costs on the inflation 
front. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just on the same risks, explaining the 
difference—and, first of all, thank you for doing the analysis; I appreciate it.  Let me just give 
you my simple take. 
Risk number 1 is, there is more slack in the economy than in the baseline, and I 
understand that. 
Risk number 2 I’m still trying to understand.  Risk number 2 is, there is not more slack in 
the economy.  Firms can’t find workers, but it doesn’t lead to inflation.  Did I hear that right?  
I’m trying to understand the mechanism behind the second one, because that one is a little less 
clear to me. 
MR. FIGURA.  Yes, you’re right.  It doesn’t lead to inflation.  What it leads to is a 
change in expectations about future real GDP growth, because there are these constraints.  And 
so it depends on there being expectations that are somewhat elevated right now about future 
December 18–19, 2018
66 of 242


 
 
 
growth.  And then bumping up these constraints reminds people that, no, that’s probably not a 
realistic outlook to assume when the economy is so far above what it should be in the longer run.  
And that change in expectations brings demand down, and the economy returns to— 
MR. KASHKARI.  Does that change in expectations—is that somehow related to a 
change in inflation expectations, or do you see those as distinct? 
MR. FIGURA.  I guess I see those as distinct.  I guess one way to think about it is to 
think about the profitability chart that I showed you.  In this scenario, the economy gets very 
tight.  Corporations don’t raise their prices.  Instead, their profit margin gets compressed as 
higher wages, alongside prices that don’t rise, squeeze profits.  And, in response, they think, 
“This isn’t where I want to be.  It’s time to start investing less and laying off workers,” and the 
economy returns—so it’s a different type of explanation.  
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  Just to follow up on this conversation:  Would President 
Rosengren’s view be summarized as an asymmetric loss function in which the Committee just 
puts different weight on unemployment being below target instead of asymmetrically? 
MR. FIGURA.  I think having a different policy rule is an explanation for some of the 
differences between the SEP median and the staff projection. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, that’s considered a different policy rule. 
MR. FIGURA.  What’s that? 
MR. BULLARD.  That’s considered a different policy rule. 
MR. FIGURA:  Yes.  I’m sorry.  What did I say? 
December 18–19, 2018
67 of 242


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, there is an objective function, and then from the objective 
function you derive a policy rule.  That would be one way to do it.  So if you put in an 
asymmetric loss function, which is in the back of the Tealbook, then you get different answers 
about projected funds rates. 
MR. FIGURA.  Yes.  I think that’s a partial explanation.  But in that scenario, I believe 
the unemployment rate falls very low.  I think, in addition, in order to recover a SEP path, you 
would also have to have aggregate demand being less than the staff is assuming, or else, if you 
just accept the staff’s aggregate demand with an asymmetric policy rule, you get to a very low 
unemployment rate; and that’s not in the SEP median path. 
MR. WILCOX.  That’s absolutely right.  I mean, the asymmetric policy rule alone isn’t 
going to get you the outcome that Andrew illustrated. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just to be clear, it’s asymmetric loss function. 
MR. WILCOX.  Sorry.  I meant—yes, I misspoke. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I just wanted to make sure we’re referring to the right thing.  So 
I look in the Tealbook, and I look at Blue Chip forecasts, and all of the staff forecasts for all of 
the variables are within the top 10 to lower 10 of the Blue Chip except for one:  the short-term 
rate, which is outside the range of the very top of the Blue Chip, the top 10.  It just seems to me 
like we’re the only ones that are sticking to the Taylor (1999) rule.  Everyone else has adopted 
something else.  
MR. FIGURA.  Yes.  I mean, because what I find also interesting about— 
MR. BULLARD.  I’m beginning to wonder if it’s written in the ancient texts somewhere 
that we must stick to a Taylor (1999) rule.  I mean, if there were other types of theories that we 
dealt with that were this far off, or that were giving us recommendations that were this at odds 
December 18–19, 2018
68 of 242


 
 
 
with what the rest of the market thought and with what even policymakers thought, we would 
probably abandon those theories and go to some other benchmark. 
MR. WILCOX.  That’s fine.  As I’ve said many times to the Committee, I have been 
prepared, and the staff collectively is prepared, to take instruction from you all.  We use the 
Taylor (1999) rule as an objective benchmark.  And if we substituted something that was more 
accommodative, if we are doing our job correctly, then, with a more accommodative monetary 
policy, we’ll have a little “hotter” economy and just ever-so-marginally slightly higher inflation 
rate.  The underlying economics would be exactly the same.  And one thing we could do in 
Tealbook A in the Monetary Policy Strategies section is to run our same economic analysis with 
different policy rules and objective functions.  So that’s fine with us. 
The characteristic that is I think quite essential in the procedure that we use is that we are 
trying to put forward a projection that is “auditable” by the Committee.  So we can give you an 
explanation—basically, down to the basis point—of why is it that the funds rate is X amount 
higher or lower this time than it was a year ago.  And be able to answer that it is not because we 
felt like it; the answer is, we can trace the reason back to change in the output gap, change in the 
inflation rate gap.  And it really is that simple. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  I’m going to answer the question “Why am I jumping 
down this rabbit hole?”  Because it’s there [laughter].  But I want to combine these two 
conversations, and I could pick up on what David just said—but also tying it to the SEP chart, 
exhibit 2. 
Typically, President Bullard uses this as an opportunity to once again bring up “Why are 
you showing us our policy rate path relative to this antiquated, outdated Taylor (1999) rule?” 
December 18–19, 2018
69 of 242


 
 
 
which is kind of the theme of this conversation.  But you actually did bring up something in your 
briefing that I thought was actually informative [laughter], which is, perhaps one interpretation 
of what we’re doing is that we’re following something like the asymmetric weight on the 
unemployment rate gap in Tealbook A.  That’s a good way to potentially think about that. 
Of course, it’s really easy for you to think about.  You could take a Taylor rule or a 
policy—a Taylor rule with an asymmetric response or something that you feel captures that, and 
you could actually show that on the chart.  And you would show that, as the unemployment gap, 
say, leads to a zero response—just to take a simple version—inflation is running at 2 or maybe a 
little bit above for most people.  You know our r*’s.  You know all of our forecasts.  Would that 
give you something that kind of looked like what our forecasts were?  I actually think that would 
be informative for this discussion to show in this picture the rule that we have in Tealbook A or 
something that’s closest to what we’re doing, as opposed to just pounding on this “Taylor 
(1999), we’re not doing Taylor (1999).”  I don’t know.  It seems to tie into this.  I’d be curious to 
see if you ran that analysis whether it looks like we’re running the asymmetric policy in making 
our SEP submissions. 
MR. LAUBACH.  Vice Chairman Williams, as luck would have it, we thought about 
exactly that idea and hope to have it in time for the next SEP questionnaire. 
The one thing that I’m a little unclear about is, we understand that normally there isn’t 
necessarily a one-to-one linkage between a particular form of loss function and a particular form 
of interest rate rule.  So the one thing that I’d just be a little cautious about is, the point of putting 
any symbols on this page was never to exactly try to reconstruct what could be a reaction 
function that describes the median path. 
December 18–19, 2018
70 of 242


 
 
 
But, obviously, we can look, because the asymmetric loss function has come up as an 
object of interest, in and of itself.  We can try to ask, “What if we translated that into a Taylor-
type rule that basically eliminates the unemployment rate gap response when the unemployment 
rate gap is negative?,” and see what that does. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  I’m glad to hear that, because I think it’s actually a 
more constructive connection between what we’re writing down as some kind of notion of what 
our objective is and—again, as David Wilcox has said, the Tealbook actually goes through that, 
and has been for— 
MR. LAUBACH.  I think it’s important.  What we show, of course, in Tealbook A are 
these, for example, optimal control simulations with an asymmetric loss function using the staff 
baseline projection, and there you get very different economic outcomes.  So there is, of course, 
the additional difference—namely, that, in some sense, with such a policy rate path, the staff 
projection would be quite different from the SEP median in its economic outcomes. 
MR. WILCOX.  Right.  And to restate what Thomas just said;  Essentially, you would 
recast the difference between economic projections between the staff and the Committee.  At the 
moment, our economic projections are quite similar to your medians, but the policy rate path is 
different.  If we made our policy rate path more similar to yours, we’d elevate our economic 
outcomes above yours. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  But that’s not the question I’m actually talking about.  
I’m not interested in the Tealbook versus the SEP.  I’m actually looking for something that helps 
us frame our SEP submissions on the basis of the coherence of the projections themselves.  So 
thinking about it in terms of, instead of showing us the Taylor (1999), it shows something that 
maybe is closer to how we’re thinking about this. 
December 18–19, 2018
71 of 242


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  This is just a basic question.  The FRB/US model has a very different 
path from that in the staff projection.  And you probably said this.  Just one more time:  What, in 
layman’s terms, is what drives that significant of a difference? 
MR. FIGURA.  The FRB/US model is interpreting what is happening right now and in 
the period beyond this year—it’s interpreting what is driving an output gap of 2.25 percent, which 
is what we’ve told it is occurring.  And it thinks that’s due to monetary policy shocks—the fact 
that the policy rate path hasn’t increased as much as the policy rule would have predicted—
aggregate demand shocks to the spending equations—the fact that BFI and PCE expenditures 
have come in a little higher than expected—and risk premium shocks—the fact that equity 
premium and bond spreads have been fairly low over most of this expansion. 
And then it’s saying, okay, given that those are the shocks that are driving the output gap, 
what would I expect, assuming that the historical behavior of these shocks continues?  And what 
it expects is that those shocks are unwound pretty rapidly—both the monetary policy shock and 
the effect of the spending shocks—and the risk premium shock goes from being something a 
little bit positive to being something negative, and those are the forces bringing down the— 
MR. BARKIN.  So it sees it as going through a significant one-time event as opposed to 
anything with sustaining momentum. 
MR. FIGURA.  Yes, yes. 
MR. BARKIN.  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR. WILCOX.  One way the process that Andrew’s describing manifests itself is in 
equity values.  And in the staff projection, what we’ve written down is very modest appreciation 
December 18–19, 2018
72 of 242


 
 
 
in equity prices of about 0.5 percent per year, because we see valuations in equity markets now as 
a little elevated. 
And we haven’t quite had the guts to write down outright declines in equity prices, but 
we’ve written down increases that are way below historical averages.  The FRB/US model has 
no compunction about writing down significant declines in equity prices, and, in a modestly 
rising rate environment, the decline in equity prices is about 15 percent. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you.  First, David, thank you for your service to the Committee.  I 
really appreciate it.  I have a question about—the supply constraints analysis in the Monday 
morning briefing I found very interesting, and it got me to think about the labor market, and 
perhaps we’re making inefficient matches between jobs and workers.  I hear that from my 
business contacts.  How does that work in the models—should I be thinking about it in terms of 
productivity growth and the supply side of the economy?  Do we take into account any of that in 
any of the things that we do here?  And how should I be thinking about that? 
MR. FIGURA.  So I do think we think, as the economy gets tighter and people are being 
drawn into the labor force to fill jobs, a lot of those people don’t have—their skill level is below 
the average of the employed people right now.  73ut73 in a composition sense, that should 
reduce productivity a little bit in the future.  We have that in the forecast.  Productivity growth is 
a little bit below trend over the medium term.  I don’t know if that is— 
MS. MESTER.  Yes.  Is there any work going on that actually tries to assign a quantity to 
these things?  I haven’t seen much work that actually tried to quantify this, but I don’t know if 
there’s literature. 
December 18–19, 2018
73 of 242


 
 
 
MR. FIGURA.  Yes.  Mary Daly and Bart Hobijn have done some work on this.  
[Laugher]  The BLS, in publishing its multi-factor productivity (MFP) and productivity statistics, 
comes up with an estimate of the contribution of labor quality that controls for experience and 
education.  And so you can follow that over time.  It tends to be countercyclical.  That is, when, 
in recessions, firms tend to lay off their least-skilled individuals, and so the average productivity 
goes up—tends to rise—and labor quality increases, and then it tends to decline over the course 
of an expansion.  So I think people have looked at it. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  I’m going to ask an actual question, but I am happy to talk more about that 
and have it in my statement.  Can I ask a question on page 7 of the exhibits?  Andrew, we’re 
using, especially, the lower-right panel on “New Employees by Prior Labor Force Status” to talk 
about why there might be remaining slack in the labor market.  And when you did that, if I 
understood how you were referencing the chart, you were looking in the cross section.  You were 
saying, well, in the cross section, “From not in the labor force” is high and “From unemployed” 
is low. 
But I was wondering if you looked over at the time series, if you could get anything from 
that, and what you did take from that, because it looks to me, just optically, that when you get to 
late parts of the expansion, you see “From not in the labor force” level off and maybe even go 
down, and “From unemployed” go down.  And so that’s another way to think we might be 
running out of slack, because we are already at these low levels.  And so I just want to know if 
you guys took anything in the staff discussions of these time seriese. 
MR. FIGURA.  You mean comparing, let’s say, the level— 
December 18–19, 2018
74 of 242


 
 
 
MS. DALY.  Over recessions and business cycles, the business cycle frequency 
fluctuations essentially, the dynamics. 
MR. FIGURA.  I’m not sure I understand where you’re coming from, but let me try first, 
and then you can correct me. 
MS. DALY.  Sounds good. 
MR. FIGURA.  When I look at the black line, I compare it with previous cyclical peaks, 
and it seems a little bit higher than before.  It seems to be perhaps lasting a little bit longer than it 
has previously, and that raises the possibility that maybe this is a little bit more sustainable than 
before.  Though the purpose of this chart is not to support the staff view.  It’s to support an 
alternative view that maybe there is a possibility that there’s more slack out there than we are 
estimating right now.  And this might be one thing that you could look at. 
MS. DALY.  Now that you’ve said that, let me try it again—better said, I think.  One way 
to interpret that is that it’s above the previous peak, so there’s more “room to run.”  Another way 
to do it is say, it’s above the previous peak, and there’s less room to run—we’re already past 
what we usually have achieved, and so we might be even further into a tight labor market than is 
typical.  And I wondered why you took the first interpretation over the second interpretation. 
MR. FIGURA.  Because I was looking for evidence that might support the view that 
there is more slack out there than we are anticipating.  [Laughter] 
MS. DALY.  I see.  Okay.  Well, as long as it’s not fundamentals-driven.  It’s just that 
you were saying, “Okay, one could look at this picture this way.”  So is the right way to think 
about what you described that one could look at this picture and think this, but there’s an equally 
plausible way to look at the picture and think that, because you don’t have additional evidence to 
try to take one position over the other. 
December 18–19, 2018
75 of 242


 
 
 
MR. FIGURA.  Yes, I think— 
MS. DALY.  And that’s fair.  I just wanted to make sure I understood. 
MR. FIGURA.  That’s correct. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you. 
MR. WILCOX.  If we were in a court of law, we would say that what Andrew was doing 
was providing representation for a client whose position is different from the staff baseline and 
doing the best he could to assemble some evidence in support of that client’s position. 
MS. DALY.  Don’t read my question as a complaint—I just wanted to make sure I 
understood how much emphasis or weight I should put on it. 
MR. WILCOX.  Right. 
MS. MESTER.  Reasonable doubt. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Can I just be clear?  Do you agree, then, that the hypothesis is a 
50–50 one, that it could be either? 
MS. DALY.  Do I?  No. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  So you think it’s more likely evidence that we’re running out 
of slack than— 
MS. DALY.  But let me be clear.  I would start with this picture, and have started with 
this picture, and I say, okay, it looks like we’re above the levels we usually achieve.  Now let’s 
look at other pieces of evidence that would help me understand if it’s 50–50. 
And when I look at the other pieces of evidence, I come down on the side that this is 
more likely an indication that we have exceeded a tight labor market threshold in a way we 
haven’t in the past than it would be evidence of additional slack.  But that’s using other evidence 
too, not just looking at this picture. 
December 18–19, 2018
76 of 242


 
 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Any more questions?  Thank you very much.  Then let’s move 
to the outlook go-round and begin with President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With deepest apologies to Charles Dickens, 
when discussing current economic conditions with my directors and contacts, I was often 
reminded of his famous novella A Christmas Carol.  I believe my contacts have been visited by 
the Ghost of Christmas Present.  In the original story, this spirit appears to Ebenezer Scrooge as a 
jolly giant amid a roaring fire alongside a decadent Christmas feast and holding a cornucopia for 
a torch.  It is a personification of abundance, celebration, and happiness, and, in short, the 
personification of the sentiment we have gathered from firms about current business conditions. 
On balance, firms report robust activity through the end of 2018 with strong profits and, 
for a few of my contacts, record revenues.  Sixth District retailers appear to be enjoying a step-up 
in holiday sales on last year’s levels that is, in general, meeting or, in some cases, exceeding their 
expectations.  These good tidings even extend to firms’ ability to manage input costs and tariffs 
in the current pricing environment.  Contacts appear to be increasingly comfortable passing on or 
absorbing these increases.  In the business-to-business space, especially in tariff-related cost 
increases, many firms are passing these along with little pushback or effect to margins.  Yet, as 
evidenced by the recent trajectory of retail prices, much of these increased costs have yet to have 
a visible effect on the final consumer.  Here, contacts describe a variety of cost-absorbing 
phenomena—such as the better ability to negotiate with foreign suppliers and the relative 
strength of the dollar—generating offsets, and the existence of cost-saving efficiencies elsewhere 
in the organization. 
Reports regarding labor market conditions have more or less remained consistent with 
previous cycles, with one exception.  In response to continued hiring difficulties and a step-up in 
December 18–19, 2018
77 of 242


 
 
 
turnover, as evidenced by the high quits rate, firms appear to have pivoted toward focusing more 
aggressively on retention.  These anecdotes appear to be borne out in the recent Atlanta Fed 
wage tracker data.  Typically during expansions, wage growth for job switchers outpaces wage 
gains for job stayers.  However, in recent months, we have seen a sharp uptrend in the wage 
growth for job stayers relative to job switchers.  This appears to be consistent with the behavior 
of firms facing increased labor turnover. 
Despite what appears to be an abundance of optimism over current conditions, when I 
asked my contacts to describe what the future holds for them, the shift in the mood and tone was 
palpable.  It was as if I had unwittingly conjured the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, that 
phantom which, quoting Dickens, “slowly, gravely, and silently approached. . . . for in the very 
air through which the Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery.”  And maybe it’s 
more mystery than gloom per se, but expressions of significant and growing concerns about 
softening demand were a common theme among my contacts and Sixth District directors.  In 
some cases, these specters of uncertainty are clear and defined—tariffs, for example.  However, I 
have heard a growing and amorphous anxiety regarding impending slowdown. 
The sentiment regarding future business conditions appears to be creating an increasingly 
risk-off environment.  To this end, I heard a few reports that companies are starting to look at 
their own business strategies and initiatives to get their house in order in anticipation of slowing 
economic conditions, through either deleveraging or holding off on expansionary projects.  We 
have some survey evidence that suggests a soft trajectory for capital investment spending 
heading into 2019.  In our Survey of Business Uncertainty—a national survey of firms we 
conduct with partners at the University of Chicago’s Booth School and Stanford University—
December 18–19, 2018
78 of 242


 
 
 
expectations regarding capital investment over the year are relatively low, and uncertainty 
regarding investment plans has risen to its highest level since mid-2015. 
Worries about tariffs and trade have dominated the conversations about the outlook and 
are present in additional survey evidence we collect.  Every December for the past handful of 
years, we have posed a special question to Sixth District firms in our Business Inflation 
Expectations survey, asking them in an open-ended framework to provide their biggest concerns 
for the year ahead.  Employing a text-analytics approach, we then categorized their responses 
into a broad set of topics.  Over the past three years, perhaps not surprisingly, the topic of costs 
has topped the list.  The interesting part is that, inside this broad category, the main driver of cost 
concerns has changed each year.  This year, tariffs emerged as the dominant source of concern 
regarding business costs in the year ahead, even outstripping concerns over labor costs.  While 
firms appear to have absorbed the initial rounds of tariffs, should tariff rates increase from here 
or encompass a broader set of goods, my contacts have said that this would likely create 
significant challenges.  They appear to have hit their limit on cost-absorbing measures, meaning 
the next round of tariffs will be a direct hit to the consumer.  Concerns over what that would do 
to sales growth are at the top of their mind at the moment. 
I have yet to change my baseline forecasts of real GDP growth or inflation materially, but 
the risks to my outlook are no longer tilted toward the upside.  I think we ought to pay particular 
attention to how firms are confronting the Spirit of Christmas Yet to Come.  To that end, my 
sense is that the happy feeling of the present will give way to more miserly behavior.  And while 
I don’t want to come across as a Scrooge, my staff literally begged me not to say “Bah, 
humbug!” in the statement.  [Laughter] 
MR. HARKER. But you just said it.  [Laughter] 
December 18–19, 2018
79 of 242


 
 
 
MR. BOSTIC.  This policy does have implications for my views of the spirit of monetary 
policy yet to come, but more on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you very much.  Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Well, that’s a tough act to follow.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  
Any outlook for the economy must contain at least three elements:  You need a set of initial 
conditions and data, you need some sort of model for the economy, and you need a reaction 
function to combine with the first two into a forecast.  A model can be mathematical or 
judgmental or some combination.  But even a “gut instinct” model is needed to deliver a forecast 
using the data.  The outlook can focus on means or on tails scenarios.  So I thought I’d talk a 
little bit right now about my thought on initial conditions, then give you some of my thinking 
about models, and then talk about some of the risks to the outlook ahead. 
Jumping off from the earlier comments by President Bostic, I would agree that, going 
into 2019, initial conditions for the economy are favorable—growth, obviously, GDP growth 
above 3 percent.  And when the Q4 data are finally released, growth in 2018 could come in at 3 
percent or above.  And certainly we shouldn’t forget that under our baseline and most scenarios, 
in July of next year, this expansion will become the longest in recorded history.  We are all 
aware that the labor market is operating at or beyond our estimate of u*.  We are starting to see 
wage gains in line with not only productivity growth, but inflation, with some upside to that.  A 
very interesting presentation was given a moment ago about labor supply, something I have 
looked at a little bit.  We have seen a welcome increase in prime-age participation.  There is 
some doubt about how much more of that we can get, but there are at least some scenarios under 
which that could continue. 
December 18–19, 2018
80 of 242


 
 
 
Price stability, of course, is the other leg of our dual mandate, and various measures of 
inflation have been running close to our 2 percent objective.  But, that said, I would point out 
that over the past six months, through October, core PCE inflation has been running at an annual 
rate of 1.5 percent, so the year-over-year numbers are definitely not reflective of the past six 
months.  Because inflation expectations are an important driver of actual inflation, we and other 
central banks are as much in the business of anchoring inflation expectations as we are in 
ma81ut8181ngactual inflation.  And, with regard to inflation expectations, I do have some 
concerns on the downside that I expressed at our November meeting.  Whether or not you look at 
surveys such as Michigan or you look at the TIPS market, I think a fair reading suggests that 
inflation expectations are, at best, just barely in the range consistent with our goal of 2 percent 
PCE inflation. 
If you look at the decomposition that our economists here and that Reserve Banks do of 
the TIPS curve, they indicate expected CPI inflation of around 2 percent.  But, remember, 
historically, PCE inflation lags behind CPI inflation, so, this is potentially consistent with PCE 
inflation below 2 percent.  The Michigan survey, which has been around for 40-plus years, is just 
barely above the all-time lowest print ever for expected future inflation.  So if those Michigan 
readings a decade ago were consistent with price stability, they are now well below where they 
were then. 
In terms of the economy, nominal GDP growth—which, for many considerations, I think, 
is more important than real—through the third quarter of 2018 is running at a 5.5 percent pace, 
which would be the fastest pace over any four quarters since 2006.  So, obviously, the aggregate 
demand side of the economy, as initial conditions, is robust.  But as we and others have 
emphasized, we have seen ex post an increase in supply in 2018, and we did see it both in hours 
December 18–19, 2018
81 of 242


 
 
 
worked and productivity in the business sector.  Investment, obviously, has been a recent 
concern, when considered in terms of the weak “print” in Q3, but recent data on orders and 
shipments of capital goods appear to be consistent with some rebound.  So that’s the initial 
condition. 
When I was filling out my SEP submission, I found it useful to compare the predictions 
of what I call my “gut instinct” model of the economy with the forecast generated by a real 
model, and for that I chose two models that the Board staff uses.  In fact, we just got a 
presentation of the FRB/US model and also the EDO model, and those forecasts are reported on 
page 92 of the Tealbook, in case you want to consult that.  But as I think we heard a moment ago 
in that excellent presentation, both of those models show a sharper slowdown in 2019 GDP 
growth than is reflected in the SEP median, and both show a much more significant increase in 
the unemployment rate than does the SEP median. 
The FRB/US model, I think, uses an inertial Taylor (1999) rule, someone told me, and 
with that, it generates along the forecast path a funds rate that rises to just above 3 percent—and, 
again, this is all on page 92 of the Tealbook for those of you keeping score—and, in particular, 
also, an unemployment rate path that, in those models, closes the unemployment gap in about 
two years.  But, essentially, under the policy rate path that we have seen in the SEP—roughly 
two hikes next year along the median path, and along all of these paths, core PCE inflation is 
around 2 percent.  So, in my own submission, I did not entirely cut and paste from the FRB/US 
model.  My gut is actually a little bit more bullish on trend growth and u* than they are.  But I 
found it useful to look at that at least to give me some sense of a framework in which a policy 
rate path similar to the one that we’re considering under a baseline returns us to our goal 
objective. 
December 18–19, 2018
82 of 242


 
 
 
I’ll conclude briefly with some risks to the outlook, and here I think I have a common 
evolution with President Bostic.  I think, compared with where I was in November, my risks 
have shifted somewhat to the downside, and let me explain why.  I would mention something we 
knew in November, which is the downshift of fiscal policy—so that’s not new, but there’s been 
some more recent evolution.  One, we’ve had some downgrading to expectations of global real 
GDP growth—not dramatic, but certainly evident.  The other thing I would point out, in 
particular with regard to the international side, is, we’ve had a big move in the dollar just this 
year—the broad trade-weighted dollar in real terms, up 12 percent.  On my Bloomberg screen, 
that index is at a 16-year high.  We know empirically that big moves in currencies have a lagged 
effect, and I don’t think the full effect of that 12 percent move has been felt. 
Mario Draghi last week alluded—in his very colorful, elliptical way—to a downgrade of 
the outlook growth for Europe.  Obviously, we have had a big shift in financial conditions 
indexes, as I have indicated, and past interventions.  A lot of these are really indexes of investor 
sentiment as opposed to borrowing costs.  But, of course, borrowing costs are up, with a rise in 
credit spreads.  And what this tells me is that the initial conditions are good.  My baseline views 
have not changed very much, but relative to the balance of risks that I saw in November, they 
have definitely tilted somewhat to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Over the past month, most real-sector 
economic data have come in as expected, resulting in surprisingly little change in most economic 
forecasts.  In contrast, many financial indicators have been downbeat.  The stock market is 
significantly lower, and the Treasury yield curve has flattened as the 10-year Treasury rate has 
fallen about 30 basis points below its level as of the previous FOMC meeting.  So now it is a bit 
December 18–19, 2018
83 of 242


 
 
 
of a dilemma as to how the seemingly conflicting data should affect our outlook and policy 
decisions.  As I mentioned, most of the economic data have come in as expected and are 
relatively upbeat. 
Payroll employment over the past three months grew, on average, by 170,000, well above 
what is necessary to keep the unemployment rate steady.  Unfortunately, the resulting downward 
pressure on the unemployment rate is occurring when unemployment is already at a level well 
below the range of most forecasters’ estimates of what is sustainable in the long run.  In addition, 
oil prices have also declined significantly.  This should provide a boost to many U.S. consumers 
as well as oil-dependent countries.  Falling oil prices would be of more concern if they were 
primarily a reflection of softening global demand.  But, as the Tealbook highlights, most of the 
recent decline can be attributed to supply factors.  In addition, retail sales have been strong, with 
most forecasters expecting the strength of consumer spending to continue through the holiday 
season. 
Consistent with these favorable data, the December Blue Chip forecast of 2019 real GDP 
growth is 2.3 percent, unchanged from November and above my and the Blue Chip’s estimate of 
potential, as it, too, expects the unemployment rate to continue declining to 3.5 percent by the 
end of 2019.  This unemployment rate forecast in the Blue Chip has been unaffected by the 
recent downturn in financial conditions and remains well below my estimate of what is 
sustainable in the longer run.  Recently, the changing prospects for reaching an agreement with 
China on trade seemed to have had large effects on financial conditions.  While most estimates 
of the effect of potential tariffs tend to predict only a modest effect on the economy, financial 
markets seem to place a much higher weight on this risk. 
December 18–19, 2018
84 of 242


 
 
 
One way to reconcile the confluence of unchanged forecasts of economic activity with 
volatile and declining financial markets would be if the modal economic forecast expects a trade 
agreement, whereas financial markets are more focused on the tail risk of a trade meltdown, 
which they see as increasing in probability.  If this characterization is correct, I would not change 
my expected interest rate trajectory, but I would be on the lookout for signs that the tail risk is 
increasing in probability and beginning to show through into real economic activity.  I also do 
not view the incoming wage data as completely benign.  Businesses have been complaining 
about difficulty in hiring workers for retail shops, restaurants, and hotels.  This seems consistent 
with a large number of help-wanted signs at many of these establishments, as well as my own 
qualitative assessment of service quality deterioration.  [Laughter] 
These sectors in which we observe these shortages are not those experiencing rapid 
productivity improvement.  From the employment cost index, wages and salaries for leisure and 
hospitality are up 3.8 percent, and wages and salaries for retail trade are up 3.6 percent.  If 
instead one uses the average hourly earnings, the comparable numbers are somewhat higher, 
rising 4.5 percent in the retail trade sector and up 4.3 percent in the leisure and hospitality sector.  
These higher wages are also consistent with the rise in labor force participation rates for lower-
skilled workers.  Those without a high-school education are entering the labor market in 
significant numbers, presumably being attracted by the higher wages.  85ut85 is certainly good 
news for those now being drawn into the labor market.  But much higher wages will ultimately 
be reflected in lower corporate earnings or higher prices, with those industries struggling to deal 
with the tighter labor market. 
I cannot ignore the recent turmoil in financial markets, however.  I have marked down 
both my forecast real GDP growth path and my appropriate policy rate path in this month’s SEP 
December 18–19, 2018
85 of 242


 
 
 
submission, in part in recognition of the upheaval in financial markets.  But, in that submission, I 
still envision some tightening that puts the policy rate above our estimate of the neutral rate, 
partially reversing the downward trajectory of the unemployment rate.  The hope is that doing so 
will minimize the multiple risks that can arise in an economy that stretches well past its 
sustainable limits but without slowing the economy down so much that we cause the next 
recession. 
Overall, in view of the divergent signals from real-sector data and forecasts relative to 
financial market data, I would want to see some evidence in the real-sector data of an emergent 
economic slowdown before deviating from our path of gradual increases in rates.  The 
divergence between the real and financial data highlights the uncertainties we currently face and 
underscores the rationale for our being more data dependent and not being too wedded to a 
particular interest rate path.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With the exception of the policy rate path, which 
I continue to believe is overly steep and unlikely to transpire, I am in general agreement with the 
staff’s near-term forecast of economic activity.  Regarding inflation, my point estimates are 
slightly stronger than the staff’s, and the distribution around my forecast is now quite 
asymmetric, with greater potential for misses on the downside and for inflation not to exceed its 
target.  Why?  If you look over the past six years, PCE inflation has averaged a mere 1.3 percent, 
and if one looks at year-over-year inflation at a quarterly frequency, it has averaged just 
1.4 percent, with only three quarters in which it exceeded 2 percent.  Thus, there is a significant 
risk that inflation is unlikely to exceed or even hit its target over the forecast horizon. 
December 18–19, 2018
86 of 242


 
 
 
The waning strength of investment presents further downside risk, and concerns 
regarding trade may cause firms to delay future capital investment expenditures.  Additionally, I 
view the picture for residential investment much as represented by the Tealbook, with little 
evidence of any positive contribution to near-term economic activity.  Activity in the Third 
District, in conversations with various contacts, supports my view of this aggregate economy.  
The Third District continues to grow at a modest pace, and the regional labor market has 
strengthened three-month employment growth to 2.3 percent in October, representing a very rare 
instance when the District has added jobs at a faster pace than that of the nation.  Labor market 
strength has been observed in mining and logging, professional business services, and in health 
and education. 
The unemployment rate continues its downward trend and is currently at 4.1 percent, 
which is below its pre-recession rate.  There’s been an increase in rejected job offers, and more 
firms than at this time last year are indicating they’re having trouble finding employees with 
desired skills.  As a result, wages are rising fairly broadly, and less-qualified workers are now 
being hired.  I’ll just give you one anecdote regarding a less-qualified worker with an A+ for 
transparency.  In a major coffee shop, there’s a very long line, and the employee working the 
register was clearly not understanding the job very well.  This individual then poked his head up 
and said to the long line, “Folks, I’m sorry.  I’m just not any good at this job.”  [Laughter]  He 
wasn’t, but he’s an honest guy. 
The manufacturing index fell in November and again in December and is currently at the 
lowest reading since August 2016.  Trade-related supply issues were a noted concern among 
respondents.  As well, firms are a bit less optimistic but are still expressing plans to increase 
future capital expenditures.  However, they are expressing clearly greater uncertainty.  My staff 
December 18–19, 2018
87 of 242


 
 
 
has compiled an average of the five regional business surveys and found it tracks the PMI 
remarkably well.  Notably, that average has recently shown a decline. 
Unlike manufacturing, though, the District’s service sector has improved, and car dealers 
report brisk activity of late.  Retail establishments remain optimistic, as do District consumers.  
Housing, however, is showing additional weakness, and permits have been relatively flat for the 
past two years.  For example, a large homebuilder in the region has just seen his stock price fall 
by 34 percent as a result.  Price pressures among our survey respondents have moderated of late, 
and they still expect prices to rise by a little more than 2 percent over the next 12 months. 
So, to summarize, we are seeing, I would say, moderate growth.  I would even call it 
“modest” in the Third District.  Growth is fairly broad based, however, and price pressures are 
declining.  Our regional activity, I think, is entirely consistent with my overall view of the 
national economy.  More on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  My comments very much mirror President 
Bostic’s—so much so that I feel the need to use a Dickens label as well.  [Laughter]  I considered 
Great Expectations but rejected that.  I also considered Bleak House.  88ut I think I’ll end up 
with the first sentence of A Tale of Two Cities that starts:  “It was the best of times, it was the 
worst of times.” 
The U.S. economy continues in our District to perform well.  The data are coming in very 
much as we’d expected earlier in the year.  We see, barring any surprises, 3 percent real GDP 
growth in the second half of 2018 and strong services and manufacturing performance offsetting 
some weakness in residential investment in agriculture.  Consumer spending has been 
particularly buoyant, backed by healthy consumer sentiment, and the recent decline in oil prices 
December 18–19, 2018
88 of 242


 
 
 
is likely to provide an additional boost.  I’ll also note that auto sales continue to run above 17 
million despite higher finance rates.  Business fixed investment did weaken in the third quarter, 
but that followed two exceptional quarters.  And I’m also heartened, as Governor Clarida said, 
that the third quarter was revised up, and that unfilled orders of capital goods have been 
increasing.  The labor market continues to perform well, with payroll employment growth at 
195,000 per month over the past six months and the unemployment rate at 3.7 percent. 
Year-over-year PCE inflation remains close to target, but we do note, as others have said, 
that core inflation has weakened in recent months.  Yet average hourly earnings are now 
increasing at more than 3 percent.  Tariff threats remain.  So, for now, I’m willing to look 
through the recent weakness in inflation but plan to watch it closely.  I do have some sense on 
the basis of discussions with contacts that increased profits stemming from the tax cut are being 
competed away as firms are unable or unwilling to raise prices in response to higher costs.  
That’s consistent with the reduction of corporate profit growth forecast in the Tealbook and 
referred to earlier in the staff presentation. 
The big news for the Fifth District remains Amazon’s decision to locate half of a 
headquarters in Northern Virginia.  Of particular interest to us, the key incentive offer to the 
company was a workforce development plan.  State universities in the region plan to expand the 
number of computer science graduates by 6,000 to 10,000 a year, and I just raise this as an 
innovative and, I think, compelling approach.  In a tight labor market, workforce development is 
the ultimate business incentive. 
In looking forward, I was struck by the fact that my contacts in the District are planning 
for another year of solid revenue growth.  They are following through on current capital 
December 18–19, 2018
89 of 242


 
 
 
expenditure projects or even expanding them.  In our employment survey, about half of 
employers are planning to increase employment, and only 5 percent are planning to reduce. 
You may have seen the Duke CFO survey headline suggesting a coming recession, but 
the CFOs in that survey still project revenue and investment growth not far from the expectations 
prevailing a year ago.  The weak spots in the District are the residential housing sector and those 
most affected by trade.  We continue to hear talk at international companies of what we’re 
calling “quiet attrition”—that is, scaling back investment projects in the United States without 
making any large announcements.  As one international contact told me, “We designed our 
supply chain with the naïve assumption that the United States would never inhibit free trade.  
Regardless of how the current issues work out, we have recognized that assumption was flawed, 
and we’re redesigning our supply chain accordingly.”  I hear similarly from people who source 
from China. 
We also continue to hear talk of supply constraints that could well show up in slowing 
employment growth in the next several months.  In our employer survey, half of the respondents 
said that labor supply issues would constrain their growth.  On net, we see business as healthy 
and business prospects as healthy.  That said, there’s a real dissonance among our contacts 
between their own growth plans and their worries about the overall economy.  One CEO called it 
“growth fatigue.” 
If things are so good, why do they feel so bad? 
Part of it reflects uncertainties about the general environment, concerns about the 
duration of the expansion, about trade and tariffs, about waning stimulus, about a global 
slowdown, about Brexit, Italy, the debt ceiling.  But many of these uncertainties are not new.  
Part of it may be that recent warning lights—such as the stock market, the yield curve, and the 
December 18–19, 2018
90 of 242


 
 
 
decline in residential investment—have amplified these uncertainties.  And perhaps our own 
comments seem less optimistic as well.  I do see margins getting squeezed.  The PPI is up more 
than the CPI.  The productivity-adjusted wage is up more than prices, and these declining 
margins affect equity values; even in a growing economy, this could be affecting business 
sentiment. 
Finally, I should raise the topic of perception.  We see 2.4 percent growth in 2019 as 
above trend and expansionary—but they see it as a slowdown.  We see a 40 basis point real rate 
as accommodative; they see it as the top quartile in the past 15 years.  The risk, of course, is that 
firms’ perception about the worsened outlook changes their plans for their own market.  This 
could shrink business investment and lead to additional cost-cutting, reducing employment.  So I 
am paying close attention to business sentiment and business investment, and we’ll talk 
tomorrow on the need to communicate that the SEP growth path is good, not disappointing. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Eighth District business contacts generally 
cited good-to-excellent results looking backward over 2018.  But they nevertheless also 
expressed considerable trepidation as they go forward into 2019.  My own interpretation of this 
seeming contradiction, which has already been mentioned several times today, is that the U.S. 
economy surprised to the upside in 2017 and 2018, but that 2019 is not shaping up to be nearly 
as rosy. 
As an illustration of the nature of the upside surprise in 2017 and 2018, consider the 
median unemployment projection of this Committee at the March 2017 meeting.  At the time, 
unemployment was 4.5 percent, and the median projection was 4.5 percent unemployment at the 
end of 2018—that is, today.  The current unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, so the economy 
December 18–19, 2018
91 of 242


 
 
 
surprised with 80 basis points of lower unemployment during this period.  At the same time, this 
Committee raised the policy rate almost exactly as projected in March 2017.  I conclude from 
this that the upside surprise in the U.S. economy in 2017 and 2018 enabled the planned policy 
rate hikes over the past two years. 
I now think that the sequence of upside surprises on the economy is coming to an end.  
The U.S. economy is widely, even universally, expected to slow down in 2019.  Some of this 
slowdown is cyclical, showing up in residential investment, autos, and other cyclically-sensitive 
areas.  This by itself might be taken as a sign that monetary policy is already modestly 
restrictive.  Some will say that U.S. labor market performance remains strong and that this bodes 
well for the 2019 outlook.  In my opinion, this may be too backward-looking of a signal at this 
point.  Also, the problem with citing labor market strength is that the feedback from labor market 
performance to inflation is exceedingly weak today, so that the consequences for inflation are 
barely discernible.  According to some recent estimates, the feedback ratio is 10-to-1, meaning 
that one needs 100 basis points of gap to get just 10 basis points on inflation. 
Instead of overworrying about how real resource utilization may or may not feed into 
inflation, we could do better by simply monitoring inflation and inflation expectations directly 
and reacting accordingly.  And, indeed, inflation by our preferred core PCE measure is 
1.8 percent year-over-year—still below our target and not meaningfully different than it was in 
late 2016 before the two-year upside surprise in the U.S. economy commenced.  If ever there 
was a time for increased inflation, it should have occurred during this two-year interval. 
In addition, inflation expectations, measured according to TIPS-based inflation 
compensation, have traded much lower over the past two months.  Five-year inflation 
compensation has declined more than 40 basis points.  If we translate the CPI-based inflation 
December 18–19, 2018
92 of 242


 
 
 
compensation to a PCE-based inflation—I agree with Governor Clarida on this—we could 
conclude that the market’s judgment is that PCE inflation will be just 1.3 percent over the next 
five years, under current policy expectations.  I take this as a market signal that the U.S. 
monetary policy is overly “hawkish,” given the current constellation of data.  Markets are not 
showing much faith in our ability to achieve our inflation objective over the forecast horizon. 
I am moderately concerned about the prospects for a further global real growth 
slowdown, especially in light of some recent data out of China.  One benchmark for assessing 
recent Chinese data would be to compare it with the China growth scare of early 2016, which put 
this Committee on hold for most of that year:  Chinese industrial production growth is softer 
today than in early 2016, Chinese retail sales growth is softer today than in early 2016, and 
Chinese fixed-asset investment growth is softer today than in early 2016.  Also, Chinese foreign 
direct investment (FDI) is down sharply in recent readings. 
Of course, these readings could reflect temporary factors, as turned out to be the case in 
2016.  However, I do think there is a good story to tell about this, which is:  Trade war worries 
are even more intense outside the United States than inside the United States.  As much as we 
hear about people concerned about trade, it’s a much bigger topic outside this country.  So it 
makes some sense to me that trade uncertainties are feeding into a global slowdown that may 
continue to gather steam if there is no resolution soon.  The Committee may wish to wait and see 
how this evolves in the quarters ahead. 
U.S. Treasury yields are down substantially over the intermeeting period:  As was 
reviewed earlier, the 2-year rate is down about 29 basis points, and the 10-year rate is down 
about 40 basis points.  The spread between the 10-year and the 2-year rates is about 16 basis 
points as of this morning.  The 10-year rate is well within a trading range of 150 to 300 basis 
December 18–19, 2018
93 of 242


 
 
 
points, in which it has traded for several years.  I think it may be unrealistic to project that the 
U.S. 10-year yield will trade at or above 3 percent consistently, when German 10-year yields are 
26 basis points and Japanese 10-year yields are 4 basis points. 
We are now at significant risk of a meaningful and sustained yield-curve inversion in the 
near term.  This will be a “bear” signal for the U.S. economy, although an actual deterioration in 
U.S. GDP would still be a year or two more in the future, even following such a sustained 
inversion. 
The simplest way to avoid an inversion event would be to pursue a less aggressive 
monetary policy.  In my opinion, previous Committees and staffs have soft-pedaled this 
important market signal.  I would cite as an example former Chairman Bernanke, who gave a 
speech downplaying yield-curve inversion then, beginning in March 2006 in a speech delivered 
at the beginning of his tenure. 
The Committee’s track record on this issue is not good.  I think we are a little bit tone 
deaf on this issue.  The base case that I would like the Committee to keep in mind is the mid-
1990s:  The Committee normalized rates in 1994 and ’95 but stopped short before the yield curve 
inverted.  The yield curve had a positive slope through the late 1990s—one of the best periods of 
performance in postwar U.S. macroeconomic history.  The yield curve finally did invert in the 
year 2000, and the economy went into recession a year later. 
The inertial Taylor (1999) rule—still being used as a benchmark for Tealbook policy—I 
think this is implicitly influencing the dot plot and perceptions of the Committee’s future policy.  
The rule was developed using data from the 1980s and the 1990s.  Suffice it to say, a lot has 
happened since then.  The rule recommends that the policy rate approach 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon.  I think it’s 4.66 percent in the Tealbook.  I see this benchmark as unmoored 
December 18–19, 2018
94 of 242


 
 
 
from the realities of today’s U.S. economy.  I suggest we work on replacing it to try to achieve 
more realistic baseline policy recommendations.  This is a big part of what we need to sell our 
policy to the public.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  We held our joint meeting of the Cleveland, 
Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh boards last week.  In light of the recent volatility in financial markets, 
the drop in investor sentiment, and the fact that the Fourth District is more exposed to autos, 
manufacturing, and trade than other parts of the country, I went into the meeting in what I would 
call a cautiously pessimistic mood.  But after hearing from the directors, I emerged cautiously 
optimistic.  Most directors said that 2018 had been a strong year and they expect continued 
strength in 2019, although probably not as strong as this year.  While one Beige Book contact, a 
major multinational manufacturer, said that concerns about trade and global growth made it 
hesitant to invest here and abroad, we have not heard more broad reports of decisions to defer or 
cancel planned capital projects. 
Overall, the Fourth District economy continues to be healthy.  The Cleveland Fed staff’s 
diffusion index, which measures a percentage of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions, posted a slight decline to 22 in December, with more than half the contacts reporting 
no change in activity over the past two months.  Activity in interest rate sensitive sectors has 
moderated.  A major national homebuilder in the District expects residential building to continue 
to slow somewhat in 2019, reflecting higher mortgage rates and home prices.  Similarly, the 
outlook among auto dealerships has moderated since the summer, but these contacts continue to 
expect relatively stable sales in coming months. 
December 18–19, 2018
95 of 242


 
 
 
District labor market conditions remain strong, although the growth in District payrolls 
this year will likely be revised down after the benchmark revisions.  Even with the revisions, job 
growth will be well above the Cleveland bank staff’s estimate of the District’s longer-run trend.  
The District’s unemployment rate has been 4.5 percent since July, about 0.5 percentage point 
below the Cleveland staff’s estimate of its longer-run normal level.  The GM assembly plant in 
Lordstown, Ohio, near Youngstown, will be closing, resulting in a loss of 1,600 jobs at the plant.  
Our staff estimates that the overall effect on the District’s labor market will be small, but the 
effect on the Youngstown metropolitan statistical area (MSA), an already struggling area, could 
be quite detrimental.  In the recent Federal Reserve System survey, 60 percent of District 
respondents reported difficulty in finding qualified workers as being among the three most 
important factors restraining their hiring.  This is an increase of 16 percentage points over this 
time a year ago. 
Of those having trouble hiring, almost two-thirds reported raising wages or other 
compensation in an attempt to attract new hires.  Last week, a major hospital system—the 
second-largest employer in the District—announced that it will raise its minimum wage from 
$12 to $15 per hour over 2019 and 2020.  Along with increases in labor costs, many contacts 
continue to report increases in nonlabor input costs and their own product prices, citing tariffs 
and stronger demand. 
As for the national economy, in my view the U.S. economy remains in a healthy position, 
with output and employment growing above trend, the unemployment rate below estimates of its 
longer-run level, and inflation near 2 percent.  Nevertheless, sentiment regarding the global 
economic outlook has deteriorated.  Uncertainties over trade policy remain unresolved, financial 
market volatility continues, stock prices have fallen, and corporate credit spreads have risen.  
December 18–19, 2018
96 of 242


 
 
 
One question is whether the moves in financial markets are signaling weakening underlying 
fundamentals.  At this point, I have not changed my view that the fundamentals are basically 
healthy.  But I am attuned to the possibility that they may be weakening. 
In response to the incoming data, I have softened my output growth forecast, revised up 
my unemployment path slightly, and made little change to my inflation projection from my 
September SEP submission.  After running well above trend in 2018, output growth in my modal 
projection will be gradually slowing to my 2 percent trend pace over the next three years, as the 
effects of fiscal stimulus begin to wane and the effects of higher interest rates continue to be 
transmitted through the economy. 
The consumer sector remains healthy, retail sales appear to be doing quite well this 
holiday season, and sentiment remains solid.  Wages are moving higher, and, despite the drop in 
stock prices, household balance sheets remain healthy.  With much of consumer debt at low 
fixed rates, the sector should be able to handle the anticipated interest rate increases, although 
mortgage originations are likely to continue to decline and the housing sector is not expected to 
contribute to growth.  The business sector remains sound, but the pace of investment has slowed, 
perhaps due to increased uncertainty about trade policy and the health of the global economy. 
Labor market conditions are strong.  Over the past three months, the unemployment rate 
has remained at 3.7 percent, its lowest level in nearly 50 years.  Over the past three months, 
payroll gains have averaged 170,000 per month, and for the year as a whole they have averaged 
over 200,000 per month—up from last year’s level and well above the range of estimates of 
trend monthly job growth.  Over the forecast horizon, I expect employment growth will 
gradually slow toward its trend rate.  This will keep the unemployment rate below my 4.5 
percent estimate of its longer-run level.  Sustaining the expansion will necessitate gradually 
December 18–19, 2018
97 of 242


 
 
 
slowing the pace of job gains toward trend.  Otherwise, the risks of an overheated labor market 
will rise.  But even with some slowing, ongoing tight labor market conditions will translate into 
some continued firming in labor compensation, in line with anecdotal reports and survey results 
of increasing wage pressures across a range of skill groups.  However, slow productivity growth 
will mean wage growth will be slower than in past expansions. 
Inflation rates are near our 2 percent target, despite some recent softening.  The recent 
decline in energy prices will temporarily weigh on headline inflation into 2019.  In my view, 
longer-run inflation expectations—including various survey measures in the five-year, five-year 
forward measure obtained from the Cleveland Fed model—have been fairly well anchored.  In 
addition, some firms have reported increased pricing power, and the economy is expected to 
remain in a sound position.  Thus, looking through the near-term decline in headline inflation, I 
expect underlying inflation to remain near 2 percent through the forecast horizon. 
While downside risks of GDP growth have increased since my September SEP 
submission, my growth path is now somewhat lower, and I see risks around this lower trajectory 
as roughly balanced.  Downside risks to growth include slower-than-anticipated growth in China 
and Europe, the possibility of a hard Brexit, increased uncertainty regarding trade policy and 
higher tariffs, losses on leveraged lending to weaker borrowers, the possibility that the moves in 
financial markets are signaling weaker underlying fundamentals, further deterioration in investor 
sentiment, and further pullback in risk-taking.  On the other hand, there are some upside risks, 
too, as these situations could actually turn out to be better than what is built into the forecasts.  
For example, the resolution of uncertainty over the trade situation could foster a pickup in 
investment.  In addition, fiscal stimulus is expected to wane next year, but there are two-sided 
risks associated with that expectation.  Tax refunds next year could turn out to be higher than 
December 18–19, 2018
98 of 242


 
 
 
anticipated, as households may not have completely adjusted withholding rates.  If so, household 
spending in the first half of the next year could be higher than expected. 
I continue to see the risks associated with my inflation forecast as roughly balanced.  The 
tightness in labor markets poses an upside risk, while the possibility of a stronger appreciation of 
the dollar poses a downside risk.  Risks to financial stability appear to be elevated, corporate debt 
and leveraged lending levels remain high, and underwriting standards have deteriorated.  
Commercial real estate valuations continue to be lofty.  Financial vulnerabilities make the 
macroeconomy more susceptible to negative shocks and could amplify an economic slowdown.  
Now, under my outlook and assessment of risks, my policy rate path includes further federal 
funds rate increases this year and next year, with the policy rate holding at a level somewhat 
above my longer-run estimate of 3 percent, before starting to decline in 2021. 
This policy rate path is shallower than in my September projection—reflecting somewhat 
softer growth and higher unemployment rate projections, as well as the fact that the labor market 
tightness we have seen to date has not translated into significantly higher inflation.  My path is 
also a bit shallower than the median path implied by the policy rules published on the Cleveland 
Fed’s website. 
Now, while my modal policy rate path incorporates further increases in the funds rate, I 
think there is considerable uncertainty associated with my path, both in terms of the pace of 
increases and the stopping point for this tightening cycle.  When the funds rate was far from 
neutral, the economy was growing well above trend, labor market conditions were continuing to 
tighten, and inflation was moving to target.  Policy decisions were fairly straightforward, 
although we may not have perceived them that way at the time. 
December 18–19, 2018
99 of 242


 
 
 
Now we have entered a new phase.  The federal funds rate is nearing the range of 
estimates of its longer-run neutral rate, and there is uncertainty around these estimates.  In 
addition, there are several risks to the forecast that can manifest themselves.  To me, this means 
having to be particularly attentive to how the incoming data affect the medium-run outlook and 
the risks to that outlook, so we can calibrate policy to achieve and maintain our dual mandate 
goals. 
Fortunately, with growth expected to slow toward trend, labor markets strong but 
inflation still near 2 percent, and the funds rate nearing neutral, we are in a pretty good spot for 
making this evaluation.  We don’t appear to be either far behind or far ahead of the curve.  If 
growth and job gains slow as expected, the unemployment rate levels out, and inflation remains 
near 2 percent, we can take some time to assess.  But if GDP growth remains at 3 percent, job 
gains pick back up to a pace of 180,000 to 200,000 per month, or inflation shows signs of rising, 
I believe we will need to move more deliberately.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Fundamentals still seem strong.  And 
President Bostic’s A Christmas Carol story reminded me of a board of directors meeting many, 
many years ago in December in Chicago, at which there was an Iowa director who talked about 
the strong beef market and how beef prices were about as strong as he could ever remember, and 
we had nothing to fear for the beef market going into the next year.  In January, I think there 
were reports of mad cow disease, and he had a totally different story the next year.  I don’t know 
why that story—Christmas?  [Laughter]  
MR. CLARIDA.  Two-sided risk?  [Laughter] 
December 18–19, 2018
100 of 242


 
 
 
MR. EVANS.  The reports received from my directors and other contacts mirrored the 
tensions we are hearing today about the outlook.  Most of the commentary about current 
economic activity was upbeat, with continued reports of strong sales, tight labor markets, and 
increasing wage and price pressures.  The recent financial market movements, moderating global 
growth, trade developments, and political tensions in the United States and abroad are generating 
wariness about the future.  On the plus side of the ledger, consumer spending is strong.  One of 
my directors reported that large retailers were bullish about 2019 and preordering accordingly.  
She also indicated that many retailers are investing in technology and logistics, a few select large 
retailers are planning on new brick-and-mortar stores, and some big internet sellers are adding 
distribution centers.  I heard other positive commentary about business spending.  A director 
reported that strong demand was leading to increased capital expenditures in the industrial 
chemical sector, and a major automaker indicated that the recent upside surprise in sales 
reflected increased buying by businesses—both by rental car companies and commercial 
customers. 
But some unease is clearly developing.  The index of business conditions that we 
construct from our Beige Book survey moved down this round, with increased forward-looking 
concerns about higher interest rates and trade.  Another cautionary report came from a major 
integrated steel producer.  He noted that higher steel prices were weighing on demand.  Looking 
ahead, he said buyers in both the spot and contract markets were pushing back on high asking 
prices for 2019.  He also said orders for an expected positive seasonal in the first quarter were 
running late, so there are some indications of weaker demand in the period ahead.  Beyond this 
comment about steel prices, however, the news on pricing and labor costs suggested firming 
inflationary pressures.  For example, one of my directors, who is CEO of a major manufacturing 
December 18–19, 2018
101 of 242


 
 
 
conglomerate, said that their corporate planning was factoring in a substantial increase in 
materials cost for 2019, and that they were expecting to pass all of these increases on to 
customers.  Wage reports were largely similar to those in the past rounds, though I did hear a bit 
more about this year’s annual increases coming in the form of base wages as opposed to bonuses 
or other one-off payments. 
Now for financial markets.  My contacts gave the familiar laundry list of factors 
contributing to the declines in equity markets.  There also is a range of explanations for the 
increase in bond spreads—from investors starting to push back on corporate leverage to lower 
demand from foreign buyers.  One interesting commentary came from a large automaker.  Poor 
market conditions have led them to hold off issuing some unsecured paper.  Their story was that 
investors have already had a bad year, and they didn’t want to risk taking more losses before 
closing their books on 2018.  Their bankers suggested that markets would be more receptive in 
January.  If they are not, the firm might forgo some issuance and think about paring back their 
balance sheet of consumer loans—basically, doing less.  We’ll see what happens. 
I should add that we did hear some upside reports about financial conditions this time—
namely, our contacts in the small business and household credit markets continue to report solid 
loan growth and strong credit quality.  In sum, these reports suggest that, while concerns have 
heightened recently, a substantial risk-off attitude has not taken over the markets—as of Monday 
morning when I wrote these comments [laughter].  I’ve had no access to my digital devices 
recently.  Furthermore, on balance, recent financial events have not restrained real-side activity.  
It remains only speculative whether this will change in coming weeks or months. 
All of these crosscurrents made for a difficult forecasting exercise this round.  We 
marked down our GDP growth forecasts for 2018 and ’19 by only one-tenth from our last SEP 
December 18–19, 2018
102 of 242


 
 
 
submission.  I think I’m SEP respondent Number 16.  We are now at 3.1 percent this year and 
2.3 percent in 2019.  We then see growth moving modestly below its potential rate in 2020 and 
2021.  We have the unemployment rate bottoming at 3.5 percent next year and moving up to 
3.8 percent by the end of the forecast period, and our natural rate assumption is 4.3 percent.  We 
recognize there are downside risks to this outlook.  Indeed, a number of businesses currently are 
considering contingencies if demand weakens.  This possible move to a defensive posture is 
something to monitor carefully. 
With regard to inflation, the incoming core inflation data were a bit disappointing, and 
the decline in TIPS breakevens does get one’s attention.  So, too, does the fact that, as Governor 
Clarida mentioned,  household survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations seem stuck 
in place.  One might have hoped that, by now, these would have shown some signs of firming.  
But I would prefer not to overreact at this point.  Our term structure models do not find much 
change in the expected-inflation component of Treasury yields.  Furthermore, the anecdotesgiven 
by our business contacts about higher wages, intensifying materials costs, and pass-through to 
customer prices point to building inflationary pressures.  In the end, we edged down our 
projection one-tenth over a portion of the forecast period but still see core PCE inflation rising to 
2.2 percent by 2022.  So there is not much change in our inflation outlook.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  Like many of you, I see a disconnect between the data—
which attest to strong fundamentals—on the one hand, and financial market volatility, on the 
other.  This disconnect makes communications quite tricky. 
December 18–19, 2018
103 of 242


 
 
 
Data on the domestic economy has come in largely as I expected since our previous 
meeting, but financial conditions have tightened, reflecting concern about trade conflict and 
growth abroad.  While my modal outlook has changed only modestly, in order to reflect the 
tighter financial conditions and some softening in the foreign economic outlook, the uncertainty 
surrounding that modal outlook has increased notably, and I’m monitoring incoming data 
closely. 
Domestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by recent data on the labor 
market and consumers.  Average monthly payroll gains of 170,000 over the past three months 
are still well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants.  While this pace slowed from its 
values earlier in the year, it remains in the range of payroll gains we saw in the preceding two 
years, a time when the unemployment rate was falling by about 0.5 percentage point a year.  
Similarly, while there were some indications of an upward movement in claims earlier in the 
intermeeting period, they moved back down in the latest reading and remain at very low levels. 
Other labor market indicators, such as job openings and quits, suggest the underlying 
trend hasn’t slowed.  In addition, the share of the prime-age population that’s working is 
approaching its pre-crisis peak. 
These labor market gains are particularly heartening in the case of demographic groups 
that traditionally face greater challenges, such as African Americans.  And wages have 
accelerated and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis.  These are 
all welcome developments. 
While the most recent reading on core PCE inflation ticked down, indicators of 
underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall—providing no signal of an outbreak of 
December 18–19, 2018
104 of 242


 
 
 
inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and some reassurance that underlying inflation may be 
inching closer to our target, on the other. 
The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to 
expect growth to remain above trend next year.  The latest data on consumer spending for the 
fourth quarter are robust, and high levels of consumer sentiment suggest continued robust 
spending. 
In addition, recent data on orders and shipments suggest business investment should be 
solid, even with recent declines in oil prices.  Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important 
boost to demand this year, and it’s projected to contribute somewhat further next year, due to the 
substantial outlays still in the pipeline.  Although residential housing has been weakening for 
some time, it has not accounted for a sufficiently large engine in this expansion to derail it on its 
own. 
Thus, the most likely path is continued above-trend growth from a position of full 
employment and inflation near target.  However, the tailwinds that provided a boost this year are 
fading, and there are some crosscurrents.  Trade conflict is the common thread that ties those two 
developments together. 
With regard to tailwinds, recent data suggest the strong global growth going into the past 
year is moderating toward trend.  The escalating trade conflict with China coming on the heels of 
earlier tariffs appears to be weighing on global growth.  Although China has shifted to an 
accommodative stance, this may take some time to gain traction, and China’s most recent data on 
industrial production and retail sales disappointed to the downside.  Recent data also suggest that 
the earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan is moderating. 
December 18–19, 2018
105 of 242


 
 
 
After being exceptionally accommodative earlier in the year, financial conditions have 
tightened considerably in recent months.  Various indexes suggest that financial conditions are 
now a neutral factor for real GDP growth in coming periods, compared with a strong tailwind 
midyear.  Corporate bond spreads tell a similar story.  They had been in the lower part of their 
historical distribution earlier in the year, but they’re now close to the middle of the distribution. 
This brings me to the crosscurrents.  It’s hard to know with any certainty what signals we 
should take from recent financial market volatility.  My conversations with market contacts 
noted some year-end derisking as well as some technical factors, but to the extent that we’re 
seeing a repricing of risk after a long period of very elevated risk appetite, it may actually 
contribute to the sustainability of the expansion.  Indicators such as bond spreads have not risen 
to levels that have historically signaled recession.  They’re now near the middle of their 
distribution.  However, I’m carefully monitoring both financial market developments and data 
for any indications of a downshift in fundamentals.  The recent weakness in oil prices, which in 
part reflects supply factors, has also contributed to volatility, particularly in speculative-grade 
credit. 
In conversations with market participants, the most commonly cited fundamental factor 
driving financial volatility is the protracted uncertainty surrounding the possible imposition of 
additional sizable tariffs on U.S.–China trade and possibly in the automotive sector.  This has 
been true of financial markets abroad, as well as here at home. 
That also corresponds to conversations with business contacts who, as many of you have 
noted, say that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for their supply 
chains is a factor weighing on their capital spending plans.  I’ve been trying to assess whether I 
December 18–19, 2018
106 of 242


 
 
 
should adjust my baseline outlook to reflect the potential disruption due to the escalation of trade 
disputes.  But, for now, this is captured as a downside risk. 
There are also risks associated with policy uncertainty.  In Britain, the near-term risks 
associated with a “no deal” Brexit are elevated, and we’re monitoring affected financial 
intermediaries very closely.  I’m also monitoring the risk associated with Italy’s fiscal policy 
deliberations, especially as the ECB nears the end of its asset purchase program. 
Finally, although the staff’s assumption that federal spending is likely to be extended 
around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires seems reasonable to 
me, we can’t rule out the possibility that fiscal policy becomes a headwind in 2020. 
As President Mester enumerated, there are also risks to the upside.  Business contacts 
report difficulties finding qualified workers and increased costs associated with inputs, tariffs, 
and transportation, along with their somewhat greater ability to pass through those increases to 
consumer prices. 
I’m also mindful that, at 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 
nearly 50 years, and payrolls are growing well above the pace consistent with stabilization of the 
labor market.  The past several times resource utilization was as tight as it is today, signs of 
overheating showed up in financial market imbalances rather than in inflation. 
Indeed, investor appetite for risk rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate 
borrowing reached new heights, along with deteriorating underwriting standards.  The run-up in 
corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets for speculative-grade and unrated firms 
close to its highest level in two decades.  Over the past year, it’s the firms with high leverage, 
high interest-expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings that have been increasing their 
debt loads the most.  These elevated exposures present a risk of amplifying any adverse shock.  
December 18–19, 2018
107 of 242


 
 
 
For corporate bonds, as Simon noted earlier, credit quality has deteriorated within the 
investment-grade segment, in which the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level 
has reached near-record levels. 
Further down the credit spectrum, leverage lending grew by about 12 percent over the 
past year, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards.  The mutual funds 
that have built up large exposures to this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could 
contribute to market dislocations and stress conditions.  This constellation of vulnerabilities 
bears watching in the current risk-off environment. 
Overall, the data have continued to suggest there’s strong underlying momentum in 
domestic demand.  However, financial market volatility and uncertainty have increased 
materially, and I will be keenly parsing incoming data for signs that risks are materializing that 
might merit further adjustments to the modal outlook and the appropriate path of monetary 
policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Let me begin by just saying that California had the latest in a large number 
of natural disasters that the United States has experienced this year.  We had two large wildfires 
that swept through parts of Northern and Southern California, and that damaged thousands of 
structures—hundreds of thousands of acres—and it claimed a considerable number of lives. 
The hardest one was also the largest and was called the Camp Fire.  It was in Sacramento 
or just outside Sacramento, and it’s on record as the deadliest in recorded state history.  Although 
the overall economic outlook won’t be very much affected by these fires, the losses for those 
communities will be hard to overcome.  Importantly, because we’ve had such severe fires in 
large numbers of areas, we’re starting to see legislative and regulatory pressure on the question 
December 18–19, 2018
108 of 242


 
 
 
of whether you even rebuild.  So I think that’s part of a conversation as we go forward, not only 
in California, but also in the other states in the District that have fire danger. 
Backing up from that, though, and turning to the broader economy, there has been a clear 
downshift in the spirit of my contacts similar to what others have talked about and that President 
Bostic and President Barkin really highlighted.  I have no Dickens references.  But, as one of my 
contacts put it, “The data are good, but the mood is bad.”  The stock market gyrations, 
uncertainty over tariffs and a global slowdown, concerns that the yield curve might invert—and 
just the sense, as I mentioned at our previous meeting, that the expansion might have outlived its 
plausible lifespan, that it’s going to run out of gas and you want to be prepared.  All of these 
things are contributing to a decline in mood. 
Now, importantly—and this is something that I hadn’t really realized previously—many 
businesses still carry a very vivid memory of the Great Recession, and they’ve become 
hypersensitive almost to any signs that the economy could be slowing.  Several such businesses 
in my District have started to pull back, sidelining marginal investment projects that just a few 
months ago were being given a green light.  And it’s important for me, anyway, to take in the 
fact that these were not small companies.  These were large companies—“household name” 
companies—who are just tabling projects that were right on the margin of whether they were 
going to be profitable or risky.  That’s going to have an effect in terms of their investment and, 
importantly, their employment. 
So I take some signal from this shift in mood.  But I have to balance it against the data, 
which have undeniably been good and, in many cases, great—that is, GDP growth, the labor 
market, and consumer spending. 
December 18–19, 2018
109 of 242


 
 
 
Although payroll and job growth in November came in a bit softer than expected, my 
staff keeps a model of weather—and the effects that that has on employment—and said that it 
explains a lot of the surprise.  Using county-level data on weather and employment, they 
estimate that, absent these weather effects, the economy would have added roughly 180,000 jobs 
in November, and that is clearly strong job growth. 
Looking ahead, I expect the strength in the labor market and the momentum that we’ve 
seen in 2018 to persist.  A strong labor market translates into further gains in wages and 
household incomes, supporting ongoing solid growth in consumer spending. 
So the question that all of us have been asking is:  “How do I put the gloomier mood and 
the incoming data together?”  And here’s how we’re doing it right now.   I’ve lowered my 
estimate of real GDP a tad to 2.2 percent next year.  That’s a very modest change, but it’s still a 
recognition.  And then, with the gradual removal of monetary policy accommodation and waning 
effects of the fiscal boost, I expect growth to moderate further in 2020 and 2021 and then, in that 
forecast period, be a bit above long-run potential.  Importantly, I would say that, emphasizing 
something that Governor Clarida talked about the previous time, it’s increasingly putting the 
self-bridling or self-restraining mechanisms in the economy in place in a way that I hadn’t really 
taken into the previous SEP forecasts. 
Now, on the unemployment front, despite its running well below its natural rate, in my 
estimation, for a persistent amount of time, I expect only a slight inflation overshoot, and that’s 
consistent with a fairly flat Phillips curve. 
In thinking about inflation, there are numerous potential risks to the outlook that bear 
watching, though, as I’m going to describe, none in my estimation move inflation very far either 
way from the 2 percent target.  First, for the upside, additional tariffs on Chinese imports could 
December 18–19, 2018
110 of 242


 
 
 
modestly boost inflation, as noted in the Tealbook and as presented earlier today.  I’m certainly 
hearing a lot of this among my contacts, especially on the matter of the supply chain—
intermediate goods.  It’s, of course, difficult to estimate in any model or any empirical analysis 
what the total effect is going to be, because so many of the tariffs—the proposed ones and the 
ones that have come through—are very deep into the supply chain.  They are on these 
intermediate goods. 
So to quantify this better and the potential effect it has on inflation, the San Francisco 
bank staff, much like the Board staff, looked at thhe detailed input–output tables to find the 
industry linkages and to really try to figure out what happens in terms of the cumulative effects 
on prices and goods and services.  If they account for all of these linkages, they find that the 
direct effect of increasing the current tariffs from 10 percent to 25 percent adds about 0.3 
percentage point to investment good prices—so that’s just things that businesses are going to 
buy—but it has a much more modest effect, around 0.1 percentage point, on consumer prices.  
This estimated effect, in my judgment, is roughly in line with what we saw in the Tealbook and 
with other analyses, and I would characterize this as modest. 
On the downside, further declines in prices for health care or other goods and services 
that have historically been less responsive to cyclical pressures could pull core inflation down.  If 
you look at the inflation data this year, the uptick in core inflation was really boosted by these 
acyclical factors—these factors that are not connected to cyclical sensitivity.  This reversed in 
October when those prices fell somewhat and core inflation went down.  So I think this situation 
bears additional watching.  However, for now, I put the risks as balanced, and, importantly, I 
would say that, either way, whether you take the upside or downside risks, both effects look 
December 18–19, 2018
111 of 242


 
 
 
modest, pushing us between 1.8 and 2.2 percent and nothing outside that range, at least in my 
estimation. 
Let me conclude with a discussion of labor force participation, which we talked about 
just an hour ago.  Over the past three years, labor force participation among prime-age workers 
has risen.  We’ve all acknowledged that and, in fact, interpreted that as potentially good news 
that the “hot” economy is pulling former workers back into the labor force.  Imagine they’re out 
on the sidelines, and we’re pulling them in.  But as President Rosengren has mentioned in 
previous meetings, this interpretation is open to question, or at least evaluation.  Labor force 
participation can increase because workers are joining the labor force, coming in from outside, or 
because workers who have jobs or are searching for jobs just stick with it longer.  They just stay, 
and that reduces labor force exits. 
Recent work by the San Francisco Fed staff looked into this issue.  They examined 
detailed data on flows into and out of the labor force—with which you can watch people move 
from any state of the labor market—and they found that the recent pickup in prime-age 
participation is largely due to a decline in labor force exits, rather than to an increase in labor 
force entry. 
Now, this is not very unusual.  In fact, they looked all the way back into the early ’90s, 
and what you find is, in every expansion, as the labor market improves and gets pretty close to 
the full expansion, unemployed workers find jobs more quickly.  So they don’t leave the labor 
force.  Employed workers are less likely to lose their jobs or to leave their jobs and be out of 
work for any point in time.  They might move from job to job, but they don’t exit the labor force.  
And this pattern is very, very similar to what we saw in the very “hot” economy of the late 
1990s.  It’s also consistent with the fact that there’s probably little slack sitting on the sidelines 
December 18–19, 2018
112 of 242


 
 
 
that monetary policy can effectively move.  Overall, it reinforces my view that further significant 
increases in participation are highly unlikely.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with energy.  A number of you 
have commented on it, so I would just make a few comments.  As you know, for most of 2018, it 
has been our view at the Dallas Fed that global supply and demand were in a fragile 
equilibrium—that is, rough balance after more than two years of oversupply. 
A few things have changed.  Number one, U.S. shale production growth has been much 
higher—not a little higher, much higher than expected.  We initially expected one million barrels 
a day of growth.  It turned out to be closer to 1.6 million barrels a day.  So that’s number one. 
Number two, Saudi Arabia and Russia increased their production in response to 
encouragement from the United States and in anticipation of a loss of up to 500,000 to 1 million 
barrels a day of supply from Iran because of sanctions.  The United States ultimately gave 
sufficient waivers so that the supply loss from Iran for the time being appears to not be 
dramatically different than expected. 
And number three, which maybe is a little different than in the Tealbook, we do 
believe—and my contacts in this industry certainly believe—that part of the price decline is 
fears, rightly or wrongly, of slowing demand growth because of decelerating real GDP growth 
outside the United States.  And one of the confirming aspects of this is that, if you look at the 
entire commodity complex, you will see weakness in that entire complex.  Not in the same time 
frame as oil.  But, a little bit before and a little bit after, commodities across the board are 
generally weaker.  This suggests, rightly or wrongly, that the commodity complex is expecting 
weaker demand in the world.  We’ll come back to that. 
December 18–19, 2018
113 of 242


 
 
 
So what now?  For 2019, U.S. production growth, we believe, is likely to remain 
robust—certainly, 1 million barrels a day, even at current oil prices.  Our survey suggests that 
most shale drilling in the Permian Basin is profitable, even at current oil prices.  And the other 
thing that our contacts note is that there are a lot of so-called ducts—drilled but uncompleted 
wells, which don’t take a lot of money to finish—and a lot of those will be finished and are being 
finished.  So you’ll still see substantial supply growth this next year. 
Also, OPEC and Russia appear to be scaling back their recent production increases, and, 
obviously, the jury is out on whether the United States will be providing continued waivers on 
Iranian production.  So we still believe we are going to be dealing with a short-term oversupply, 
but it’s in the context, we still believe, of a global oil market that’s in a fragile equilibrium.  But 
there is going to be a whole lot of price volatility, reflecting these various uncertainties. 
We would also note, as some of you have commented on, when oil prices decline, on the 
one hand, it helps consumers, but it certainly will negatively affect oil industry cap-ex.  In 
particular, we see are already starting to see distress among a number of the service-providing 
companies in this industry.  Because of this offset, the net effect on U.S. GDP growth is likely to 
be more muted than in the past.  The other thing we would note—and that some of you have also 
commented on—is that downdrafts in oil prices tend to negatively affect the high-yield market, 
because debt issued by energy firms is a material percentage of the high-yield leveraged debt 
markets, and we think that does explain part of the recent high-yield widening. 
Regarding the 11th District, job growth remains strong, but we do expect, and already are 
seeing, a noticeable deceleration as we end 2018 and head into 2019.  Most notably, our survey 
respondents continue to cite rising input costs and the inability to hire needed workers, but also 
December 18–19, 2018
114 of 242


 
 
 
an inability also to pass on increased costs to the customer, particularly if they are in the business 
to customer space versus business to business. 
Almost 60 percent attribute rising costs to tariffs, and two-thirds cite increased business 
uncertainty due to tariffs and the threat of tariffs, which are having a chilling effect on capital 
spending and expansion decisions.  I almost would describe it as “tariff tension exhaustion,” 
which is starting to wear people out.  It is one thing if there is a stall or a truce, but I think what 
I’m learning about everywhere I go in our District is that the retaliation to steel and aluminum 
tariffs is showing up in surprising places:  The cheese business is down dramatically.  Why 
cheese?  It’s a 25 percent retaliation.  And soybeans we have talked about.  But the retaliatory 
effects are really affecting certain industries. 
Lastly, regarding the U.S. economy, I have downgraded my base case for 2019 growth 
from what I estimated in September.  But I will say that my views regarding the balance of risk 
and the level of uncertainty have materially changed, and I think there is a high level of 
uncertainty, at least for me, in regard to the outlook.  And I’m one of the people that in my SEP 
forecast not only downgraded the balance of risk but also increased the level of uncertainty. 
What are the reasons?  Most of them have been stated already, but I’ll tick them off.  
Fiscal stimulus is likely to fade in 2019 and ’20.  Corporate profit growth appears likely to 
materially slow in 2019.  Higher input costs, margin pressures, and inability to pass on cost 
increases to customers may have a chilling effect on business investment and, ultimately, job 
growth. 
I do carefully watch corporate earnings reports, and my experience is that it’s unusual to 
see companies announce good results but warn about the outlook.  And I see that that 
December 18–19, 2018
115 of 242


 
 
 
phenomenon is pretty widespread right now, in that a number of companies are warning down 
their 2019 estimates, in light of their concern regarding economic growth. 
As has already been said, credit spreads on corporate debt are widening, and I worry.  
We’ve noticed over the past 3 or 4 weeks—and I used to run this business earlier in my career—
that you haven’t seen any high-yield debt issuance.  That tells me—and I know, talking to certain 
companies—the reason you’re not seeing more high-yield issuance is not that people don’t need 
capital.  They’re worried that they don’t have access, even at widening spreads.  This tells me we 
may be at the beginning of a credit crunch.  We’ll see if it materializes, but it appears that way 
to me. 
Global growth rates appear to be decelerating, and you can list the reasons.  As President 
Bullard said, trade tensions are concerning to us, but outside the United States, they are far more 
significant in terms of growth prospects.  The United Kingdom, I don’t need to talk about; Italy.  
And even in Mexico.  We were hopeful about the new president.  With the airport project being 
canceled, as you all mentioned, I think there is much more concern now, and we are seeing that 
already in the currency in Mexico.  ECB challenges.  Certainly, slowing Chinese underlying 
GDP growth.  And all of these may ultimately spill over onto U.S. real GDP growth.  Again, all 
of these, I think, are consistent with weaker commodity prices pretty much across the board. 
It’s our sense that the trade tensions are deceptive, in a way, in that while they are not 
affecting headline real GDP growth, in surveys with our contacts, they are widely affecting 
margins of businesses.  But, more important, maybe the biggest effect is psychological—creating 
business uncertainty.  For instance, we have a number of car dealers in our District who are 
saying if these 232 tariffs are put in place, they expect the car sales to go from 16.8 million this 
December 18–19, 2018
116 of 242


 
 
 
year to being down 1.5 million cars.  They hope it won’t happen, but they are starting to get in 
the mode of “We better prepare for it.”  And a 10 percent decline is a big decline. 
Certainly, there is uncertainty regarding the effect of eight rate increases by the Federal 
Reserve, affecting the economy with a lag.  Increasingly, I’m hearing about uncertainty 
regarding the gradual reduction of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the effect that might 
be having on liquidity in times of stress. 
We have already talked about—and this is old news—sluggish workforce growth because 
of aging demographics increasingly, though, posing a constraint on growth.  And the question is, 
as President Daly mentioned, how much capacity really is there for underrepresented groups to 
more fully participate in the workforce? 
On the bright side, I am cheered by the fact that we have a very tight labor force.  And 
consumer spending has been in good shape, as are household balance sheets.  Having said that, I 
must tell you, at least one or two mall operators whom I talked to in the United States reported a 
good October and a good November, and they are telling me something surprising is happening 
so far in December.  They had gone into December thinking they were going to have a great 
Christmas.  They are now saying, “We’re hopeful we will still have a great Christmas, but it 
looks to us it may be a good Christmas.  And we can’t really explain what we’re seeing in 
December, but it’s weaker so far in December.”  We’ll see what that means.  They don’t know 
yet what it means. 
Against this backdrop, recent inflation readings—the Dallas trimmed mean, for 
example—are more muted.  Cyclical inflation pressures certainly are building because of tight 
labor markets and rising input costs, but I continue to believe—and we continue to believe—that 
these are being muted by technology and technology-enabled disruption as well as globalization.  
December 18–19, 2018
117 of 242


 
 
 
So I don’t expect inflation to run away from us.  I think the structure of the economy is changing 
in ways that maybe we haven’t experienced in our lifetime, particularly on account of the advent 
of distributed computing and computing power—which is having an effect on pricing power. 
The punchline is, I actually don’t see risks to the outlook as balanced.  I see them as 
weighted to the downside.  Of course, with time, these risks and uncertainties may well be 
resolved in a favorable manner.  And I’m hopeful they will be—in which case I would upgrade 
my outlook, and I would be supportive, if that were to happen, of proceeding with further rate 
increases.  But I’m not prepared to jump to that conclusion today.  And more than that, in view 
of what is going on with inflation, I don’t think I need to jump to that conclusion today. 
I do believe that we are nearing an inflection point, if we are not already there—that 
we’re at risk of overdoing the pace of withdrawal of accommodation.  I’m not sure that our 
destination is the wrong destination.  But I think we are at risk of overdoing the pace.  We’ll 
know, of course, in hindsight.  I’m certainly not smart enough to know, but it strikes me that the 
risks are greater that we are moving impatiently at this point.  And I think muted inflation 
readings give us flexibility to be patient.  I think it would be a mistake not to use this flexibility, 
and I think President Bullard mentioned the episode of 2016 when, early in the year, we saw 
turmoil in China, we were patient, we allowed it to be resolved, and then we were able to 
continue with rate increases. 
I hope that this experience will encourage us to be patient from here.  I’m not so sure we 
won’t be continuing to raise rates into the future, but I think it’s more likely we’ll have that 
opportunity if we are increasingly patient during this period.  I’ll speak more about this in the 
policy go-round tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
December 18–19, 2018
118 of 242


 
 
 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  I’m going to drop any literary references.  [Laughter] 
The outlook for the 10th District economy generally remains positive, albeit tempered by 
ongoing trade uncertainty, weaker oil prices, and a depressed agricultural sector.  Our most 
recent surveys of manufacturing and services activity, which will be released later this week, 
point to continued expansion with a favorable outlook but at a slower pace of expansion, as 
ratings have softened in the past two months to levels last seen in November 2016. 
Our most recent energy survey shows lower oil prices are weighing on firm 
fundamentals, with oil prices falling below the average survey respondent’s profitable price, 
although District contacts do note that some of this risk is mitigated with hedged positions 
through the end of 2019. 
Finally, the District’s agricultural economy remains depressed.  A new farm bill passed 
both houses of Congress last week.  While its provisions are not expected to change the current 
dynamics for this sector, it does resolve uncertainty about the future of farm policy, and it 
maintains crop insurance as a key support to the sector.  Additionally, the recent announcement 
that China will buy soybeans from the United States is relatively positive news, although the 
order represented only a fraction of 2017 soybean exports to China and future orders are 
uncertain.  In the meantime, the President and the USDA announced yesterday a second round of 
trade mitigation payments for producers deemed to have been affected by retaliatory tariffs. 
For the national economy, my current projections for growth, employment, and inflation 
are little changed since the September SEP submission, although I did make a slight downward 
adjustment of my estimate for the natural rate of unemployment, and downside risks have grown 
more prominent in my assessment. 
December 18–19, 2018
119 of 242


 
 
 
I expect real GDP growth to slow next year to around 2.5 percent, with the 
unemployment rate declining a bit further as growth continues to remain above its trend rate.  
While my outlook remains relatively unchanged, three factors have influenced my thinking about 
the appropriate path for the funds rate over the next few years.  First, the outlook for inflation 
continues to be benign.  While we saw some firming of inflation this year—as year-over-year 
measures of headline and core PCE inflation reached 2 percent—data over the past several 
months suggest some modest softening of these inflationary pressures beyond the direct effect of 
lower oil prices.  This incoming information suggests that inflationary pressures remain modest, 
and, thus, I expect only modest increases in inflation over the medium term. 
Second, despite strong labor markets, with unemployment running below most estimates 
of its natural rate, there are few signs of wage pressures showing up in the data.  According to 
my District contacts, one explanation is that firms are actively using a wide range of nonwage 
incentives to attract and retain workers in part to limit wage growth as they seek to remain 
competitive in the marketplace. 
Third, downside risk has been growing during the intermeeting period.  While I agree 
with the Tealbook box that supply factors are part of the story behind the recent oil price decline, 
I read today’s signals and commodity and financial markets as reminiscent of 2014.  At that time, 
the oil price declines initially appeared to be mostly supply-driven, similar to some of the 
commentary regarding the current decline.  But with the benefit of hindsight, it is clear now that 
slowing global growth, particularly in China, precipitated that decline.  Of course, determining in 
real time whether this decline is due primarily to supply or demand factors is difficult.  When I 
look back at the 2014 episode, we observed two important developments.  First, cross-asset 
December 18–19, 2018
120 of 242


 
 
 
correlations with oil prices strengthened, with the dollar and risk spreads rising as oil prices 
declined.  Second, equity prices and inflation compensation fell in tandem with the price of oil. 
The recent decline in oil prices has similarly coincided with the rise in the dollar and risk 
spreads and declines in equity prices and inflation compensation.  Moreover, these movements in 
commodity and financial markets have taken place against a backdrop of deteriorating global 
Purchasing Manager’s Indexes (PMIs).  As a result, I’m inclined to take some signal from the 
recent drop in oil prices that global demand may be faltering, with further disinflationary effects, 
as evidenced by the recent decline in five-year inflation compensation. 
Taken together, these factors have caused me to flatten my funds rate path.  And I wait 
for evidence in the coming months that risks to the outlook are not meaningfully tilting to the 
downside, and that the economy remains on track to continue its long expansion. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As many have already observed, current 
national data indicate that, overall, the economy is performing well and conditions are quite 
good, while the underlying fundamentals appear to be strong. 
The labor market continues to show healthy signs, with the unemployment rate 
continuing to be below normal with expectations, and there is a sustained pace of job creation.  
This growth has also resulted in some improvement in wage growth. 
The most recent consumer spending reports released last week are very strong and have 
exceeded staff expectations, so we can add more to the list of good news.  This data would 
appear to demonstrate a positive outlook and confidence in the economic conditions.  In addition, 
inflation appears to be stable and running very close to our target. 
December 18–19, 2018
121 of 242


 
 
 
A few areas of note and continued monitoring.  Some areas dependent on financing have 
been affected by increases in borrowing costs.  For example, there’s continued evidence of the 
residential housing market slowing during 2018, with some notation made of affordability 
concerns expressed by potential borrowers. 
In one area in particular, as President George noted, in the agricultural sector, there are 
signals that conditions are not improving but, instead, are continuing to deteriorate.  And, 
nationally, banks are continuing to report agricultural loan delinquencies, which have slightly 
increased in recent months, indicating potential repayment concerns.  The effects of increases in 
borrowing costs for struggling agricultural producers can be intense.  Most production loans 
feature variable rates, large balances, and a single annual payment, which may be renewed 
annually or extended over a limited number of years.  While this may seem like a small segment 
of our economy, agricultural production also affects other related areas, including agriservices, 
machinery, equipment, and other agribusiness categories that are heavily dependent upon this 
sector.  The effect is magnified by a limited market because of decreased exports, as many have 
mentioned; trade-agreement uncertainty, which is a common theme; and continued low 
commodity prices, as President Kaplan has just noted.  But most of the producers have also 
historically large inventories of their commodities.  And the stresses in this sector are continuing 
now into the fifth year. 
This is further compounded by data supporting anecdotal evidence reflecting an increase 
in the number of producers undergoing voluntary liquidations and bankruptcies resulting from 
ongoing multiyear challenges in conditions, changes in production levels, and input costs 
exceeding commodity sale prices.  The effects are being felt industry-wide, with bankruptcies of 
dairy producers and crop producers alike. 
December 18–19, 2018
122 of 242


 
 
 
For the past several years, as a state bank commissioner, my agency worked with many 
community banks to identify and mitigate risks related to carryover debt and loan restructuring.  
At some point, this either begins to improve or becomes an even greater area of concern.  
December is generally the busiest time for agricultural loan renewals, and many bankers are 
currently in discussions with borrowers making assessments of their operations to determine loan 
terms for the coming year. 
Again, as President George noted, a few recent developments provide a potentially 
brighter outlook.  Over the past week, China has placed a large order for soybeans, which is one 
of the targeted commodities in those trade discussions.  We hope that the farm bill will be 
finalized in the near future, and support programs are now available for soybean sales.  This 
certainly provides a rosier outlook, but the industry still merits close monitoring. 
Another area I’m interested in following is the labor market—specifically, whether we 
have engaged or are approaching capacity for those able to participate in the labor force 
nationwide and, in particular, in rural and nonmetro areas, as many have discussed earlier today. 
It’s reassuring to see that the nationwide data are reflecting general progress in this area, 
even if more so for women than for men. Nonetheless, I’m pleased to see that the trends are 
improving and heading in what I view as a positive direction. 
I’d also like to thank Andrew and the staff for their analysis of the labor data and for your 
help last week.  Thank you. 
This has been an area of interest for me since returning to Kansas in 2010, both from the 
perspective of a rural community banker and as a state bank commissioner.  That focus area is an 
assessment of whether the country is at full, or has expectations of full, participation in the labor 
market and what may be the actual barriers to entry or reentry into that market. 
December 18–19, 2018
123 of 242


 
 
 
There may be many factors with respect to this.  Some could be the effect of opioids and 
other drugs on the ability of individuals to engage fully, participate, or be productive in the labor 
market if they’re participating or possibly, as Andrew noted, due to disability and other factors 
that might encourage or discourage their participation in the market.  And I look forward to 
learning more about that in the coming months. 
Finally, as many have noted, there appears to be an undercurrent in the business 
community of unease about future conditions.  And although the data do not currently reflect this 
concern, business sentiment seems to be less positive than the data indicate.  And this certainly 
bears watching.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Notwithstanding the recent volatility in 
equity markets and the deterioration in market sentiment, the hard data remain solid, and my 
basic outlook is unchanged.  I do see growth slowing somewhat next year but remaining strong, 
and I remain optimistic about the longer-term outlook. 
Significantly, the labor market remains strong, with spillovers to economic activity as 
evidenced by the robust increase in November retail sales, and the decline in oil and gasoline 
prices should provide enough to boost consumer spending even as it weighs on investment and 
production in the oil sector.  Lower oil prices will show up in lower headline inflation, but core 
inflation looks to stay close to target. 
The fall in equity prices has been disconcerting, but I don’t think any of us should find it 
completely unexpected, in light of what our assessment of market valuations were.  Of course, 
we have to look for signs that volatility in equity markets is spilling over into the real economy 
by depressing sentiment or confidence, consumption or investment, and it does seem that the 
December 18–19, 2018
124 of 242


 
 
 
market has become more focused on risks, whether that’s related to trade or the international 
outlook—Brexit. 
All in all, those are risks that we’ve been talking about for some time.  It doesn’t seem to 
me that they’ve gotten much worse in the past few weeks, and it may be that what we’re seeing 
in the market developments is a bunch of smart people who are looking forward to the future 
being visited by the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come.  But—someone mentioned it.  I do think 
that we should perhaps discount it a little bit, because market participants are sort of living in a 
different year than most of those in the real economy have been living in.  This hasn’t been as 
good a year for hedge funds and other market participants.  So, rather than looking to the Ghost 
of Christmas Future, they may simply be in a different movie.  [Laughter]  They may have been 
visited by the Ghost of Christmas Present from the movie Scrooged with Bill Murray, who was a 
gratingly-voiced comedienne who kept hitting him in the face with a toaster.  [Laughter] 
In the longer run, I am still optimistic on the economy’s potential investment.  It took a 
breather in the third quarter, yes, but recent indicators support a pickup in capital spending in the 
fourth quarter.  We all know that productivity growth on a quarterly basis is volatile, but it did 
grow 2.25 percent, on average, over the past two quarters, and that was the fastest pace in 
some time. 
What about the outlook for productivity?  The staff view is that tight labor markets bring 
down productivity growth, as less capable workers join the workforce.  But it’s also likely that 
tight markets could lead to firms economizing on labor and cutting the excess in waste.  Overall, 
my outlook is premised on the view that strong potential growth will allow the economy to 
expand reasonably fast while limiting additional pressure on inflation, and so the path of policy 
rate hikes can be gradual. 
December 18–19, 2018
125 of 242


 
 
 
But I’m also aware that, by many measures, the labor market and the economy are very 
tight.  President Mester mentioned the Monday morning briefing of December 10, which I 
thought was revealing in the number of nonprice indicators of constraint—firms reporting 
insufficient supply of labor, insufficient supply of materials that are at a multidecade high.  And I 
mean not just high relative to the past few years, but over decades. 
So while it’s true that inflation pressures still remain muted, as I said previously, my 
confidence band around the quality of the signal coming from inflation is widening.  And while 
market-based measures of inflation expectations have fallen, perhaps on account of the steep 
falloff in oil prices, survey-based measures remain well anchored.  That’s good, and we should 
work to keep them that way. 
And, Mr. Chairman, in furtherance of my slavish commitment to transparency at 
whatever the personal cost, I am SEP participant number 11. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was trying to guess whether you would 
adjourn the meeting before we got all the way through the go-round [laughter], and then I 
could— 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Stay tuned.  
MR. KASHKARI.  Yes.  And then I could rely on Google to try to find a Dickens 
reference.  [Laughter]  I’ve got nothing. 
Starting with the local economy, moderate growth continues in the Ninth District.  Most 
sectors continue to do well, with the notable exception of agriculture, as others have noted.  
Retailers reported a strong Thanksgiving and are, so far, upbeat on holiday shopping.  
December 18–19, 2018
126 of 242


 
 
 
A couple of less positive indicators—residential investment continues to slow.  Our 
contacts, obviously in the oil sector, also report lower expected capital expenditures in the 
Bakken region. 
Many firms continue to complain about tight labor availability.  I’ll give you a quick 
anecdote.  Over the summer, the guy who does my lawn did a yard cleanup—an annual yard 
cleanup.  I was really surprised by the price.  I emailed him and I said, “How come it cost so 
much?”  He explained it.  I wrote the check.  And then a month later he dropped me as a client.  
Well, I interpret that as the labor market was tight, and he was exercising his leverage, which I 
applaud him for doing, even though I was annoyed in the moment. 
Businesses are complaining of higher turnover.  Yet wage growth still remains 
surprisingly moderate.  And, notwithstanding my own lawn-care charges, price pressures also 
remain moderate.  In looking forward, recent business surveys indicate a slightly softer outlook 
for 2019 compared with 2018, especially for capital expenditures. 
For the national economy, solid economic growth continues, led by consumer spending.  
Labor market indicators generally remain strong.  Over the past three months, the U.S. economy 
has added somewhere between 0.5 million and 1 million jobs, depending on if you look at the 
establishment versus the household survey.  The upward trend in prime-age labor force 
participation rate (LFPR) seems to be continuing. 
President Daly, one thing that I look at a little differently than you:  If people are 
choosing to stop exiting, I think that’s fine.  I think that’s a positive indicator, and it doesn’t 
represent unsustainability as I interpret it.   
Nominal wage growth continues around 3 percent.  It seems to be rising, but slowly, so it 
may not imply high inflation to come in light of productivity growth.  And earlier in the year, 
December 18–19, 2018
127 of 242


 
 
 
inflation and inflation expectations looked pretty stable at 2 percent.  Recent signs are that 
inflation expectations have softened a bit.  12-month core inflation is now at 1.8 percent.  Since 
June, all of the monthly numbers have come in below 2 percent, and market-based measures of 
inflation expectations have declined since our previous meeting, with the five-year, five-year 
down around 17 basis points. 
One important factor behind declining inflation expectations is probably the sharp decline 
in oil prices—down about one-third since their peak in October, and down 18 percent since our 
previous meeting.  This decline is likely to depress headline inflation over the next year or two, 
with some bleed-through to core inflation. 
The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis has these risk-neutral probabilities for the 
inflation outlook.  The chance of inflation—according to these probabilities—falling below 
1 percent over the next five years is now 20 percent, while there is only a 4 percent chance of it 
exceeding 3 percent.  So that is consistent with inflation expectations being maybe a little bit 
low.  I don’t take too much signal from the recent softness of inflation, but it does confirm for 
me—I don’t see any evidence that inflation is about to surprise us to the upside.  I’m not calling 
it a miss on the downside, but there’s not much risk of an upside surprise. 
In other notable developments in financial markets, the yield curve continues to flatten, 
with the spread between 10-year and 2-year Treasury yields  now around 15 or 16 basis points.  
Spreads on corporate bonds are rising, and the stock market has been volatile.  All of these imply 
some increased downside risk.  And then if you look around the world, as we discussed earlier 
with the staff, the Tealbook is now forecasting only 1.6 percent growth for advanced foreign 
economies in 2019 and a substantial markdown in the emerging market economies, from 3.7 
December 18–19, 2018
128 of 242


 
 
 
percent to 3.3 percent.  And then, of course, there are risks associated with trade with China and 
a hard Brexit. 
So, in summary, the U.S. economy continues to grow solidly.  I see strong continuing job 
growth absent much wage growth—which suggests to me that slack remains in the labor market.  
There is no sign of inflation moving above target; instead, there are some signs that inflation is 
softening.  So, for me, the balance of risks now seems somewhat more tilted to the downside.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m still struggling with 
what President Kashkari said.  Do you really write checks?  [Laughter] 
MR. KASHKARI.  I’m trying to keep that practice. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  We might need this real-time gross settlement system 
after all.  [Laughter] 
The dissonance between what is and what may be is striking.  On the one hand, nearly all 
of the recent hard economic data are signaling strong momentum in economic activity and labor 
markets.  To use a California driving analogy, it is like we are speeding down I-5 on the lookout 
for the California Highway Police (CHIPs).  On the other hand, global and financial market 
developments are flashing warning signs of impending doom, and this reminds me of navigating 
hairpin turns on the Pacific Coast Highway, where any mistake can send you off a cliff. 
Now, my assessment is, elements of truth are in both of these road-trip narratives.  The 
incoming data on economic activity have been very reassuring, and they have been consistent 
with my forecast of a strong U.S. economy—entering the New Year with considerable 
momentum.  Consumer spending, in particular, stands out in this regard.  In terms of anecdotes, 
December 18–19, 2018
129 of 242


 
 
 
recent data do suggest there has been a big surge in heavy winter outer garment purchases in my 
neighborhood in New York City. 
GDP growth this year looks to be a touch above 3 percent, and the labor market continues 
to get stronger.  Wage growth has increased near levels consistent with productivity trends and 
2 percent inflation. 
At the same time, the downshift in growth next year that we had been expecting now 
looks likely to be more pronounced than previously thought.  Assuming it persists, the sharp 
tightening in financial conditions—in terms of asset prices, widening risk spreads, and the 
general shift towards a more risk-off sentiment—will undoubtedly crimp business and household 
spending next year, and the global growth slowdown likewise will take a bite out of exports. 
In addition, something—or some things—is taking the air out of the housing market.  My 
staff has been looking closely at the evidence on where and why housing markets are cooling.  
So I will comment on that in a little bit more detail. 
You need to look no further than this room to locate one culprit.  Housing is, after all, the 
most—among the most, if not the most—interest-sensitive sector in the economy.  And the 
increase in mortgage rates this past year has, predictably, cut into housing construction and sales. 
In addition, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act greatly reduced the tax subsidy to homeownership 
in two ways.  First, the increase in the standard deduction means that far fewer households take 
advantage of tax deductibility associated with homeownership.  And, second, the new stringent 
limits on the deductibility of state and local taxes as well as mortgage interest mean that the tax 
advantage for those who do itemize is much smaller than before, especially for those living in 
states with high state taxes and having higher-priced homes. 
December 18–19, 2018
130 of 242


 
 
 
Because these tax changes occurred at roughly the same time that mortgage rates were 
rising, it is hard to tell the two effects apart just by looking at the aggregate time-series data.  So 
my trusty staff delved into the details and examined how home sales and home prices have 
behaved differently, depending on state tax rates and how expensive homes are in regions.  And 
what we have learned is that the tax changes are having large negative effects in certain regions 
and are likely contributing to the slowdown of the national housing market that is likely to persist 
for some time. 
Regarding home sales, recent declines are most pronounced in the two categories—that 
is, the higher-tax northeast and west regions and for higher-priced homes.  For home prices, my 
staff looked at the house-price-to-rent ratios using the multiple listing service (MLS) microdata.  
And the analysis finds that the price-to-rent ratios in high-tax states for which we have data have 
declined sharply relative to those in low-tax states.  Furthermore, the relative decline is greater 
for higher-priced units than for units near the median price. 
Taken together, this evidence suggests that the tax cuts, combined with higher mortgage 
rates, are behind the shift in home sales and in prices in large parts of the country.  And because 
neither factor is likely to reverse any time soon, I expect the housing sector to continue to cool 
next year and also these factors to exert a downward drag on home price appreciation in coming 
years. 
In response to the tightening of financial conditions, slowing growth, and a more 
pessimistic outlook for the housing sector, I have lowered my real GDP growth projection for 
next year to 2.25 percent—slower, yes, but still above my estimate of potential growth of 
1.8 percent. 
December 18–19, 2018
131 of 242


 
 
 
Regarding trend productivity growth, I heard my colleague once again espouse some 
confidence or optimism about that.  I did ask my staff to rerun our models.  We have a few 
models we look at for trend productivity growth.  One is this Kahn-Rich regime-switching 
model.  I won’t go through the details, but it has actually proven to be a really useful way to 
think about productivity growth trends.  That model puts an over 90 percent probability that we 
are still in a low-growth phase of about 1.3 percent productivity growth.   
And a model that Thomas Laubach, Rochelle Edge, and I developed about a decade ago, 
which is a Kalman filter model, also suggests productivity growth of around that figure.  So, at 
least on the data that we have and the models that we have, there doesn’t seem to be a significant 
shift in productivity trends yet. 
With another year of above-trend growth, I expect the unemployment rate to bottom out 
around 3.5 percent next year. 
On the inflation outlook, like President Kashkari, I agree that the absence of signs of 
elevated inflationary pressures despite a really strong economy—and that could be whether you 
look at inflation data, you look at inflation expectations, you look at labor costs, you look at 
energy prices, all of these factors—I think they are all telling the same story, and that has caused 
me to lower my forecast core inflation path by 0.1 percentage point.  So I now see core inflation 
picking up—edging up to 2 percent next year, and peaking at 2.1 percent in 2020. 
Consistent with these modest changes in the outlook, I now foresee a somewhat 
shallower funds rate path.  Indeed, if it weren’t for this adjustment in the monetary policy path, 
the downward adjustments to my projections for growth and inflation would have been larger.  
And I now see the center of the target range reaching a cyclical peak of 3.1 percent eventually.  
In real terms, this is 0.5 percentage point above my estimate of long-run r* of 0.5 percent.  With 
December 18–19, 2018
132 of 242


 
 
 
this change in the policy rate path, I view the risks to the outlook as roughly balanced.  That said, 
further tightening of financial conditions or a downgrades to global growth represent prominent 
risks to the economic outlook that I will be paying particularly close attention to in the 
coming year. 
I am SEP participant number 3.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  I am going to invoke the “mercy rule” and call it a 
day for now.  I’ll start tomorrow with my remarks, which have about as much to do with 
monetary policy, anyway, as they do with this.  I may also use some of the time to come up with 
a really good Dickens quote.  [Laughter]  We now adjourn to the elegant West Court Café and 
I’ll see everybody down there.  Thanks very much. 
[Meeting recessed] 
 
 
December 18–19, 2018
133 of 242


 
 
 
December 19 Session 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Good morning, everyone.  I hope everyone had a good 
evening.  In our last episode, I left my comments on the outlook and monetary policy for this 
morning, so let me jump right in.  And I’ll begin with a quote from the great Charles Dickens—
no.  [Laughter]  Actually, he didn’t say anything about monetary policy, at least anything that I 
could find overnight. 
The picture that many of you have described is one of strong nonfinancial data amid 
turbulent and tightening financial conditions as well as moderation in global growth, increasing 
uncertainty, downbeat sentiment, and perhaps growing downside risks.  As some of you summed 
it up—well, I think:  “Data good, mood bad.” 
The run of nonfinancial data for the U.S. economy has generally been strong, in keeping 
with our expectations.  The labor market has remained strong, with solid job creation, gradually 
rising compensation, and many indicators at levels consistent with full employment.  
Participation has continued to surprise to the upside. 
Despite lots of reports of bottlenecks and supply constraints, inflation has remained near 
our 2 percent objective.  In fact, it has lately come in just a bit more muted than expected. 
Real GDP growth has been strong, supported by strong consumer spending, solid 
business fixed investment over the year—despite what looks like a third-quarter pothole—and 
expansionary fiscal policy.  Growth is on track to come in at its strongest level since 2006, and 
this will likely be the first 3 percent growth year of this long expansion. 
Against the background of this strong economic performance, many of you noted an 
increase in financial market volatility and the meaningful—not to say, perhaps, ongoing—
tightening in financial conditions.  Many of you also noted the moderation of global growth 
December 18–19, 2018
134 of 242


 
 
 
through 2018—which disappointed expectations of another year of strong, synchronized global 
growth.  And these factors have led many of us in our SEP submissions to lower our expectations 
of real GDP growth in 2019 by a modest amount and to write down a flatter, more growth-
supportive rate path.  The median forecast for next year is of a meaningful decline in growth 
from today’s rate to 2.3 percent, followed by growth at the high end of our range of estimates of 
trend in 2020.  The median participant wrote down only two rate increases over the course of 
2019. 
I’m finding it useful to look back over the past year and ask what we can learn.  In late 
2017, 12 months ago, growth was running well above its trend rate, and the labor market was 
very strong.  We expected that to continue, with inflation moving up to 2 percent in relatively 
short order.  There was good reason to expect that the synchronized global real GDP growth of 
2017 would continue.  We expected some U.S. fiscal policy stimulus, but what we got was both 
larger and more front-end loaded than expected. 
A key question during the first half of this year was how the U.S. economy, already 
operating at or near or even beyond full employment, would react to this unprecedented 
procyclical fiscal boost.  Would inflation break out meaningfully above 2 percent?  Would 
unemployment decline to ever more historically-low levels not seen since the Korean War?  
Would the labor force participation rate rise to absorb some of the stimulus?  Would we see 
evidence of supply-side room to grow?  Would the dollar rise by more than expected, sending 
some of that demand abroad? 
This year’s experience provides some tentative answers to these questions, and those 
answers shed light for me on the risks to the outlook.  In particular, instead of breaking out, 
inflation has remained muted.  Upside risks to inflation failed to materialize this year despite 
December 18–19, 2018
135 of 242


 
 
 
growth well above potential, the unemployment rate very low and declining, tariffs being 
implemented, and numerous reports of bottlenecks and supply constraints. 
In looking ahead, our SEP submissions show growth next year modestly above trend and 
a small further decline in the unemployment rate.  By 2020, the economy is growing close to our 
estimates of the potential rate. 
I would not be at all surprised to see upward movement in inflation over the next year or 
so.  But while I’m not sounding the “all clear,” the risk of a troubling upside breakout of inflation 
seems to have diminished, at least for now. 
Expectations appear well anchored, and the dreaded nonlinearities have not shown 
through at current levels of resource utilization.  Our steady, gradual rate increases probably 
deserve some of the credit for allowing us to safely explore the effects of very low 
unemployment. 
On the supply side, the participation rate did surprise to the upside, as did productivity 
growth this year.  Only time will tell whether these welcome developments will be sustained.  
The staff has marked up its estimate of potential output over the year.  I’m sympathetic to that 
assessment, and I see, at this point, a bit more upside risk to trend growth now than I did around 
this time last year.  I do not see as at all likely a material upward movement in labor force 
participation.  That would require an active, sustained, and focused effort on the part of the 
legislature and not just accommodative monetary policy, in my view. 
In the draft statement, we’ve added a clause to the “balance of risks” sentence, noting that 
we will “continue to monitor global economic and financial developments and assess their 
implications for the economic outlook.”  As evidenced in your comments, in our surveys, and in 
public discussion, both business leaders and financial market participants are seeing not only a 
December 18–19, 2018
136 of 242


 
 
 
somewhat weaker outlook, but also growing downside risks.  I would not want to take too much 
signal from this, in the context of the strong incoming data as well as still-high confidence 
readings. 
Neither would I want to be too dismissive about it.  And I will mention three risks in 
particular that seem to have been a focus of markets and businesspeople.  First is the risk of 
further tightening in financial conditions and the related risk that the tightening to date will have 
greater negative effects than have shown through in our baseline estimates.  Financial conditions 
have deteriorated quite sharply, and that process may not have run its course.  And as we believe 
that monetary policy operates with long and variable lags, some of the effects of our gradual rate 
increases have likely not gone through yet. 
Second—and this is kind of both an upside and downside risk—when enacted, many saw 
the fiscal impetus as highly procyclical.  If the economy does weaken, it will turn out to be less 
procyclical than feared—even, perhaps, well-timed.  And the meaningful support for demand 
that our baseline shows for 2019 and ’20 may turn out to be welcome in that event.  However, on 
the other side, we also face a downside risk that the fiscal impetus may wear off faster than we 
estimate, and a number of outside forecasters are projecting that. 
On the third risk, global growth has declined and is running roughly at potential.  I think 
we’re absolutely right to characterize growth as moderating, as opposed to falling or weakening.  
Nonetheless, there’s clearly a risk that the global picture may darken further, perhaps because of 
trade conflicts or an unexpectedly turbulent Brexit. 
In summarizing these downside risks that seem to have captivated markets of late, I do 
not mean to—and I will not—overemphasize the negative.  Financial market turbulence 
regularly passes as quickly as it arrives.  My baseline view is that, one way or another, Brexit 
December 18–19, 2018
137 of 242


 
 
 
will come off in a way that is not overly disruptive.  It is certainly possible that market skies will 
clear and that our concerns will again shift to stretched valuations and frothy markets. 
So, what are the monetary policy implications of all of this?  With solid incoming 
nonfinancial data and a still-favorable baseline forecast, I see it as appropriate to raise the target 
range for the federal funds rate another 25 basis points.  Such a rise would leave the funds rate at 
the bottom of our range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level.  Our often-discussed point 
estimates of the neutral rate have, in a sense, reached a point of declining utility in our setting 
and communication of policy.  Now that we are entering the range of neutral estimates, I see it as 
time to put those point estimates aside and watch incoming data closely to inform our assessment 
of the evolving outlook and risks and the appropriate stance of policy. 
If the downside risks do not become realities and the data come in roughly as expected, I 
judge that some further gradual increases in the target range will be appropriate.  If we do raise 
the federal funds rate today, that will be our ninth rate increase over three years.  In addition, the 
balance sheet has declined materially, and that process will accelerate next year with another 
$500 billion in runoff. 
Taken together, all of this has materially shifted the stance of monetary policy.  With 
growth expected to decline to closer to trend next year, we can afford to be patient about further 
policy firming, especially in an environment in which inflation is still muted. 
It is, obviously, a highly sensitive time in markets.  I think our message should begin with 
the fact that 2018 has been a very good year for our economy, and that we forecast a continued 
solid performance.  However, the public also needs to see that we have taken on board the rather 
significant tightening in financial conditions, the moderation of global growth, and the risk that 
these factors could worsen, further restraining growth. 
December 18–19, 2018
138 of 242


 
 
 
Lastly, we should stress that neither the pace nor the endpoint of any further rate 
increases is known.  There is no preset course.  We will be focusing on incoming data to inform 
our assessment of the outlook, of the risks to that outlook, and of the appropriate path of 
monetary policy to keep the expansion on track, with a strong labor market and inflation near 
2 percent. 
Finally, in thinking about next year, our forecasts for 2019 are for continued, 
meaningfully above-potential, real GDP growth, further strengthening in the labor market, and 
inflation remaining close to 2 percent.  As we consider further policy firming, I will be looking 
for evidence that the economy remains on a path roughly in line with that forecast. 
Thank you very much.  And with that, that concludes our outlook go-round, and I’ll turn 
it over to Thomas. 
MR. LAUBACH.5  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the handout 
labeled “Material for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 
Since your September meeting, market participants have come to expect a lower 
policy rate path beyond 2018.  As shown by the black and orange lines in the upper-
left panel, the OIS path moved down appreciably over this period.  The most likely 
path of the federal funds rate projected by the median respondent to the Desk’s 
surveys, shown by the blue dashed line and the green dotted line, also shifted down, 
albeit by slightly less.  Understanding the primary reason behind the lower policy rate 
expectations now than in September may be important for your choice of 
communications at this meeting.  Three natural possibilities, noted in the upper-right 
panel, are that markets perceive a shift in your reaction function, with little change in 
the outlook; a downward shift in the baseline outlook; or a significant increase in 
downside risks, with little change in the modal outlook. 
Movements at the long end of the nominal yield curve and in far-forward inflation 
breakeven rates may be informative in understanding recent moves in policy rate 
expectations.  Beyond a certain horizon, expectations of a more accommodative 
reaction function of the FOMC ought to be reflected in higher nominal yields and 
higher expected inflation.  However, as shown by the blue line in the middle-left 
panel, far-forward Treasury yields have moved down sharply over recent weeks and 
are now 20 basis points lower than at the time of the September meeting.  Similarly, 
five-year-ahead, five-year breakeven inflation, not shown, has declined about 30 basis 
 
5 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
December 18–19, 2018
139 of 242


 
 
 
points since September.  Thus, market participants do not appear to view the lower 
near-term path of the federal funds rate as a sign of a more accommodative monetary 
policy reaction function that would result in higher inflation than was expected three 
months ago. 
If, instead, the declines in far-forward Treasury yields are a sign of greater 
pessimism or caution among investors, do they reflect a significantly lower modal 
path of the federal funds rate over coming years due to a weaker economic outlook or 
lower inflation, or a perception of increased downside risks?  While we do not have a 
precise answer to this question, term structure models can provide a perspective—one 
that is, admittedly, model dependent.  As shown by the pink region in the middle-left 
panel, the range of estimates of the federal funds rate expected 5 to 10 years ahead 
derived from three term structure models has barely declined in recent months.  
Similarly, the long-horizon federal funds rate expectationsin the Blue Chip and Desk 
surveys have held steady.  These observations suggest that the sizable decline in the 
Treasury yield curve reflects, to some degree, increased perceptions of downside risks 
that the models interpret as lower term premiums, in addition to a slightly lower 
expected path of the federal funds rate in the outyears. 
This interpretation of recent moves in the OIS path is consistent with what you 
would communicate to the public if you were to adopt alternative B at this meeting, 
as well as with your SEP.  Your statement would signal only modest changes in the 
economic outlook.  However, to achieve those outcomes, the median of your funds 
rate projections suggests that a slightly lower path of the federal funds rate is now 
called for, with only “some” further gradual increases.  Replacing the verb “expects” 
with “judges” in that sentence hints at somewhat less certainty about the appropriate 
path than previously.  With this slightly lower projected path of the federal funds rate, 
you would continue to see the risks to your economic outlook as roughly balanced, 
but you would signal that the implications of recent global economic and financial 
developments for the outlook are somewhat unclear and that these developments bear 
watching. 
Of course, as shown by the orange dots and the orange line in the middle-right 
panel, there is a sizable gap between the median SEP path and the current OIS path.  
But, as shown by the blue crosses and the blue line, broadly similar gaps existed a 
year ago, and such gaps didn’t seem to present major communications challenges.  
Over time, these gaps were resolved—sometimes with the forward path moving 
closer to the median SEP path, and sometimes with the SEP path doing the 
adjustment—but usually without much drama in financial markets. 
Let me now assume that you adopt the language in alternative B, and that the 
economy will continue to evolve broadly in line with your outlook.  You will then 
confront the question of how and when to change the statement language to remove 
the guidance of “some further gradual increases” and to communicate the dependence 
of your future decisions on incoming data.  As noted in the lower-left panel, the 
changes you made in June and September have already cut back on explicit, 
directional forward guidance regarding the future path of the funds rate.  With the 
December 18–19, 2018
140 of 242


 
 
 
median SEP funds rate path suggesting only three further hikes after this meeting, 
presumably the reference to “further gradual increases” would need to be removed the 
next time you raise interest rates; removing it before then would likely be read as a 
further downshift in your anticipated federal funds rate path. 
You may also want to make changes to the statement to communicate a properly-
understood notion of “data dependence.”  In particular, at coming meetings, you may 
want to emphasize that incoming data will inform your assessment of the cyclical 
position of the economy and your estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate and 
federal funds rate.  That such assessments are inherently hard to make is illustrated in 
the lower-right panel, which shows the 70 percent confidence intervals around 
estimates of the real longer-run neutral rate usingseven macroeconomic models that 
we periodically present in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of Tealbook A.  
Emphasizing data dependence is particularly pertinent at the current time, when the 
data may not clearly signal on which side of neutral the federal funds rate lies. 
One possible way of conveying the message that your outlook for the economy 
and monetary policy is responsive to incoming data might be to pick up a thought that 
was removed at the time of the June meeting.  At that meeting, the assessment that 
“the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are 
expected to prevail in the longer run” was excised from the statement.  This sentence 
was followed by the caveat—reproduced as the last bullet in the lower-left panel—
that “the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as 
informed by incoming data.”  That caveat arguably applies not only to the assessment 
that was removed from paragraph 4, but also to your current economic outlook.  It 
clarifies that the incoming data matter for your policy decisions insofar as they 
change your economic outlook.  Reintroducing some language to this effect might 
help communicate that, with the funds rate near neutral and so long as the economy 
remains near your objectives, the Committee can provide less guidance about the 
pace and destination of the future funds rate path. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks; the November 
statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 9 of the handout.  I will 
be happy to take questions. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you very much, Thomas.  Questions for Thomas? 
MR. EVANS.  Can I ask a question? 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  In paragraph 2, the word “gradual”—“gradual increases”—is “gradual” 
playing a role that seems important?  I mean, in the past, it kind of touched on magnitude and 
pace, in my opinion.  Is it superfluous now, or is it playing an important role? 
December 18–19, 2018
141 of 242


 
 
 
MR. LAUBACH.  In my recollection, I don’t think that “gradual” was much tied to the 
magnitude.  I think that was more in paragraph 4, “the timing and size of . . . adjustments”—that 
language that’s still there.  The “gradual,” in my perception, was always about, how many 
25 basis point steps a year?  It was not about, could there be a 50 basis point in there?  So that 
was my understanding.  I don’t know whether that’s universally shared. 
MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR. KAPLAN.  I might just follow that up. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  At 2 to 2.25—or now 2.25 to 2.5—percent, in view of the fact that 
“gradual” is about pacing, which I think is what you just said, is it still useful at this stage, in 
your view? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I think the question is:  How would removing “gradual” now be 
understood?  Again, insofar as it indicated, in the past, “unlikely to have increases at two 
consecutive meetings,” say, I’m not quite sure how a removal now would be taken, because that 
is certainly not what the Committee would now be considering at this juncture, right?  I mean, at 
this juncture, I guess the question is, how far would any future increases be spaced out?  I don’t 
know, Simon, whether you have thoughts on how that might be interpreted. 
MR. POTTER.  People expect some change in the language.  This is definitely a change 
in the language.  It does keep “gradual.”  “Gradual” seems to have worked really well over the 
past few years.  It was really designed to prevent markets from thinking you might do more than 
100 basis points over a year.  So I don’t think there’s much risk with this statement that they’ll 
have a different viewpoint on “gradual.” 
December 18–19, 2018
142 of 242


 
 
 
I think I understand what people are saying.  What is it actually getting you right now?  I 
think it’s just getting you not having to ask another question:  By removing “gradual,” are you 
trying to signal something?  And I don’t think you’d be trying to signal something.  So the usual 
thing is trying not to do any harm or make it more complicated. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Let me say that I think it’s a very fair point.  It’s pretty touchy 
out there, and why take even a bit of tail risk on it?  That’s all.  I think that your points, though, 
are extremely well taken, and it’s something that has a short shelf life remaining, I believe. 
MR. KAPLAN.  That’s very helpful. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes.  Thomas, the last thing in your bullet point on the bottom left, this 
“actual path of the . . . funds rate will depend on”—is there a reason not to put that in now and to 
wait? 
MR. LAUBACH.  If I were to think of one, I would say:  In this instance, perhaps, go 
more gradualist.  You already have two meaningful changes in the statement—well, three, 
including the hike.  So I’d worry a little bit about making too large a pivot at once, as, arguably, 
the plain reading of it should simply be, you’re alert.  You already have one indication that 
clearly says you are alert.  So I don’t know whether that would be too much to add another. 
MS. MESTER.  But if you’re thinking about the next statement, if the idea is to take out 
“further gradual” and put this in, that seems like a less gradual way of changing the statement, 
and maybe we’d be better off to put the bottom— 
MR. LAUBACH.  Yes.  Okay, I apologize.  I’ll offer here my own views, obviously.  I 
would think that the “actual path” language could be introduced regardless of whether the 
Committee makes a move at a particular meeting.  The removing of “further gradual increases” 
December 18–19, 2018
143 of 242


 
 
 
really depends on, well, are you going along the baseline outlook?  You’re raising once more.  If 
you expected only two more moves, then probably “further gradual,” with the expectation of two 
more, is no longer appropriate, because “further gradual” may hint at more than that.  This 
language here is about the data dependence—I think you could do that at any meeting, regardless 
of whether you raise rates. 
MR. POTTER.  Also, you have press conferences at every meeting now, which makes it 
easier to make a change in the language at any of the eight meetings coming up.  And it might be 
good to have a change at a non-SEP meeting. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Vice Chairman Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  A two-hander on that.  I mean, I agree in principle that 
this language makes sense.  You know, we’re already in the two-handed economist’s world with 
the statement.  We’re raising rates and, at the same time, indicating concerns about global 
economic and financial developments.  We’re already indicating through the SEP that we’ve 
slowed our pace of increases.  That’s a pretty significant shift in the SEP. 
I think adding the third phrase would potentially just confuse the message, more than I 
think at least the views I heard yesterday would suggest.  I just think it’s like Simon said—what 
are you trying to do when you change this language?  Are you really pulling back from the 
“further gradual increases” in a way? 
I do think there’s a nice evolution—which I’m going to talk about in my comments—but 
there’s a natural evolution as we get away from “further gradual increases” to, in a way, replace 
that with this stronger data dependence. 
I would also highlight that my favorite paragraph of the statement is paragraph 4, which 
does say very clearly that, in determining all of our future actions, “the Committee will assess 
December 18–19, 2018
144 of 242


 
 
 
realized and expected economic conditions” relative to our goals.  So I think that’s always an 
anchor for our approach. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Can I follow up on that point about paragraph 4?  I’ve always wanted to ask 
this question, so now that I’m here at the table, I can.  [Laughter]  If you have paragraph 4—this 
is not a complaint; it’s just a question—what’s the logic of putting this third bullet point in your 
left-hand panel in paragraph 2?  Because you already have paragraph 4, so what are we trying to 
say additionally?  If we went to the language in alternative A, for instance, when we get to a 
place where we don’t think we’re going to raise a lot faster or more, what’s the advantage?  I 
guess another way to put it is:  Is this language an intermediary between what’s currently 
alternative B and what’ll eventually be alternative A, or how do you think about it? 
MR. LAUBACH.  I wouldn’t interpret this language as necessarily tied to a migration 
toward something like alternative A.  In the past, I think, when the Committee adopted this 
language, it was intended at that point—immediately before that was the sentence that I quoted 
about the expectation that the funds rate would remain, and so on—to remind the public that this 
is really an expectation.  This expectation could change with incoming information—so that it is 
not a firm commitment or promise, but it is really contingent on the incoming data. 
To me, what’s currently in paragraph 4 is more a general principle that hints at reaction 
function–type behavior.  This sentence that I have in the third bullet, to me, more plays the role 
of reminding the audience that we are providing you with an outlook—but this outlook can 
change over time, and if it changes, then the appropriate policy rate path will change as well. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  President Bullard. 
December 18–19, 2018
145 of 242


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  I do have one question for Thomas.  In the first paragraph, the 
last sentence says “Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on 
balance.”  Is that really a fair assessment in view of the fact that TIPS-based inflation 
compensation has fallen rather precipitously here?  And in the past, if we wanted to make a 
distinction, we often said survey-based measures haven’t changed, but TIPS-based measures 
have fallen. 
MR. LAUBACH.  I guess the “on balance” this time around is carrying quite a bit of the 
load.  Arguably, the survey-based measures are in a very similar place to where they were 
before.  I mean, Michigan is toward the lower end of its range, but it hasn’t broken through that 
lower end.  The TIPS have moved a lot.  That’s right.  It reminds me of 2014–15, when we also 
saw large effects of oil price declines on TIPS breakevens that, at the time—they always present 
a bit of a puzzle why 5-to-10-year breakevens should be so sensitive to that.  We see that 
behavior, I believe, again now. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes, but we’ve acknowledged it before; now, we’re not going to. 
MR. POTTER.  But we were careful to talk about not expectations, but the compensation 
for inflation.  Compensation for inflation in markets has come down.  Whether that means that 
inflation expectations at the 5-to-10-year horizon have come down 30 basis points seems 
unlikely to me, and the models are not supporting that kind of move in the expectation.  What 
seems to have happened is— 
MR. BULLARD.  Market-based indicators have been good forecasters of actual inflation 
over the past decade. 
MR. POTTER.  They’ve been okay.  They’ve been a little bit under, because the inflation 
risk premium really shifted. 
December 18–19, 2018
146 of 242


 
 
 
MR. BULLARD.  Survey-based measures are biased to the upside. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes, possibly. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I just want to press Thomas on the—you know, we have talked 
about this in the past; now, we’re going to exclude it.  It seems to me that what the interpretation 
will be is that Chairman Powell’s FOMC doesn’t care about the TIPS-based measures anymore, 
whereas the previous incarnations of this Committee did care about this. 
MR. LAUBACH.  What I can say is that you had basically gone back to language that 
wasn’t used before mid-2014.  And then in the fall and winter of 2014–15, that was when the 
Committee split up the inflation expectation sentence into the two separate pieces about 
breakevens and survey-based measures.  You’ve chosen to reunify these two pieces into one 
concise statement.  I’d be surprised if that was understood as dismissive of the inflation 
breakevens. 
In addition, I think when you did the split, arguably at that time, core inflation was still 
running quite a bit lower than it is now.  So at that time, I think, low-inflation concerns were 
somewhat more pronounced than they are at the current juncture.  Maybe from that perspective, 
there’s slightly less need for that now. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Vice Chair. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  I agree with Thomas completely.  I have a couple of 
comments.  One is, oil prices obviously have plummeted.  That’s had an effect on breakevens, 
for reasons that maybe we don’t fully understand in our models.  The second, obviously, is that 
there is a movement from “risk on” toward “risk off”—which I think is affecting the relative 
prices of the Treasury securities. 
December 18–19, 2018
147 of 242


 
 
 
But, finally, I think about the lesson from that episode that you’re referring to—and 
you’re absolutely right.  There was a time, as Thomas also said, when we got into the game of, 
meeting by meeting, tweaking our views on inflation expectations in response to the various data 
we looked at.  I think, in the end, that didn’t serve us well—constantly having to decide, is 12 
basis points enough or not?  And I think here, this is, I would say, a judgment or an assessment 
of the Committee that, overall, we feel that inflation expectations, or indicators of inflation 
expectations, haven’t changed enough to highlight that. 
I do think the fact that we mention it is clearly a sign that we are monitoring it and we’re 
paying attention to it.  It’s just that, for the reasons relating to the gap between breakeven 
inflation versus inflation expectations and assessing the other measures that we look at, this 
doesn’t rise to the occasion of putting some red ink there indicating that this is particularly 
concerning.  And, actually, Thomas’s point is spot on.  Inflation is running essentially at our 
target.  It’s a different context, I think, than a few years ago. 
MR. BULLARD.  But—just to follow up on this—you could say survey-based measures 
have not moved, and then you don’t have to say anything about TIPS one way or the other.  It 
seems to me what you’re saying is that I fed it through my affine term structure  model and I 
decided it was all in the term premium.  That’s not going to cut it, I think, because markets are 
very sensitive to these things. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Can I say that I, too—I don’t remember.  I remember well that 
we had both survey measures and breakevens in the statement for a long time, and it did devolve 
into a discussion over, 8 basis points or 12 basis points?  And do you look at the Bloomberg 
measure or the Board measure?  It was really not a useful exercise for me in the end, so we took 
that out.  I don’t want to get back into that business.  I really do think, with TIPS measures, 
December 18–19, 2018
148 of 242


 
 
 
they’re quite volatile.  They are affected by—five-year, five-year-forward—spot oil price 
changes, for reasons we don’t really understand.  It doesn’t make that much sense on the face of 
it.  At the same time, sustained changes are something that we take note of.  But volatility—I 
wouldn’t want to be in the statement business again of doing that. 
So I think I can handle the question in the press conference very well, but I wouldn’t 
want to put it back in the statement and get back in that business.  Once it’s in, it’s not going to 
go out again for a long time, and we’ll be, meeting by meeting, having to say what breakevens 
did.  I don’t think that is where we want to be, if I may say.  I note President Evans is nodding 
his head. 
MR. EVANS.  I’m fine. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  All right.  Further questions for Thomas?  [No response]  
Seeing none, let’s begin our policy go-round, starting with Governor Clarida. 
MR. CLARIDA.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support our decision today to raise the target 
range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points and add the language that we will “monitor global 
economic and financial developments” as they affect our assessment of the economic outlook. 
With this decision, the federal funds rate will be just below the range of longer-run 
estimates of r* presented in the December SEP and will be much closer to the vicinity of r* than 
it was when the FOMC started to remove accommodation three years ago.  How close is a matter 
of judgment, and there is a range of views on the Committee.  Two key inputs to my—and, I 
suspect, your—reaction function, which is some version of a forward-looking Taylor-type rule, 
r* and u*, are uncertain.  And I believe the FOMC should continue to update our estimates of 
them as new data arrive, just as the Committee has done for the past number of years. 
December 18–19, 2018
149 of 242


 
 
 
Yesterday I made reference to the fact that, to do a forecast, one needs data, a model, and 
a reaction function.  In going forward, I think we need to be cognizant of the balance that we 
should strike between using models, being forward-looking, being preemptive, and being right.  
In particular, I believe preemptive hikes to snuff out a model-predicted surge in inflation would 
need to be balanced against the cost of being wrong if the model is wrong.  To me, this suggests 
placing particular weight on actual inflation and various measures of expected inflation and 
relatively less weight on model predictions. 
Speaking for myself and under a favorable set of initial conditions—inflation very close 
to target and unemployment close to, if not through, full employment—and conditional on the 
outlook and the risks to the outlook I discussed yesterday, I believe that we can afford to be 
patient in 2019 as we assess both the pace and destination for any future rate moves that we 
might consider.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  With real 
GDP likely to continue to grow at a faster-than-potential rate over the next year and the 
unemployment rate likely to fall further below what is likely to be sustainable in the long run, it 
is appropriate to raise rates 25 basis points at this meeting.  If, as I expect, labor markets continue 
to tighten and wages and prices continue to rise gradually, it will be appropriate to continue to 
raise interest rates gradually over next year. 
I would not be in favor of stopping our steady ascent to the equilibrium federal funds rate 
in response to recent financial market volatility.  While I do not dismiss the possibility that 
financial markets are anticipating a global slowdown—for example, as signaled by the 
substantial decline in stock prices around the world—financial markets are volatile and can 
December 18–19, 2018
150 of 242


 
 
 
reverse themselves quickly.  In fact, we have had a number of false signals from financial 
markets in recent years.  I don’t know if this will be another; but I would prefer to wait to see 
corroborating evidence in real-sector economic data before significantly reducing both my 
forecast and my interest rate path.  While I’ve made some downward adjustments to both for this 
SEP round, I still expect growth somewhat faster than potential next year, conditioned on three 
funds rate increases during the year. 
Monetary and fiscal policy continue to be accommodative, making removal of 
accommodation appropriate unless the economy slows more than we are currently forecasting.  
However, as I suggested yesterday, I would, of course, be prepared to alter my policy rate path if 
weakness in financial data is accompanied by real-sector data that suggest the economy is likely 
to grow slower than potential.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do think we are at some risk at today’s 
meeting of coming off as too “hawkish” and as tone deaf, and I’m going to talk about that here. 
First of all, I think it’s unnecessary to come off as “hawkish” at this meeting.  We can just 
delay until the next meeting and make the move then, so it’d be easy to just wait one meeting.  
That’s been the behavior of the Committee in the past in these types of situations.  And all we 
have to do is cite core PCE inflation, which is at 1.8 percent year over year—barely any 
movement despite two years of considerable upside surprise in U.S. macroeconomic 
performance.  The easy thing to say is that inflation has come in lower than what we thought—
so, in going forward, we have a little more room to be more patient. 
Market-based measures of inflation expectations are falling precipitously.  I think this 
sentence at the end of paragraph 1 that just ignores that is going to sound tone deaf.  I think you 
December 18–19, 2018
151 of 242


 
 
 
should at least acknowledge it.  Or if you don’t want to acknowledge it, if you want to say that 
my prior is that inflation expectations never move, then say “Survey-based indicators of long-
term expectations are little changed, on balance.”  I think that’d be fine.  It probably does reflect 
the view of the Committee as a whole, even though I would take more signal from TIPS-based 
compensation. 
So it’s a good time to be patient and to wait and see how the effects of two years of 
tightening filter through to macroeconomic outcomes, and that’s my advice to the Committee at 
this juncture.  Furthermore, there’s a very reasonable narrative about a global growth 
slowdown—Europe, Japan, and especially China and some of the related emerging markets.  
You’ve got the oil price falling, which could be taken as a sign of decreasing demand globally.  
You’ve got a trade war that’s causing far more uncertainty and angst outside the United States 
than it is inside the United States.  That fits with the global-slowdown story. 
This could develop into a more serious downturn, although that’s not the base case at this 
point.  But since inflation is coming in low and inflation expectations are low in the United 
States, we can just wait and see if that’s what happens and move at the next meeting if some of 
this uncertainty gets resolved.  So, again, I think this is consistent with the way the Committee 
has successfully handled this type of situation in the past, and I’d encourage the Committee to 
think in these terms both at this meeting and as it goes forward. 
Pushing ahead with a rate hike and suggesting more to come despite low inflation 
readings and flagging inflation expectations could be viewed as overly aggressive and may feed 
into a sharper growth slowdown in 2019 than we would like.  The yield curve could invert, 
fueling and feeding into negative sentiment.  I think it is going to invert in 2019 if we keep on 
this path. 
December 18–19, 2018
152 of 242


 
 
 
Taking these types of risks at a meeting like this might be worth it if inflation was 
running above target and we really felt that we had to be aggressive to keep inflation and 
inflation expectations contained.  But it’s not running above target; and it’s not been running 
above target consistently since 2012.  You know, if we were price-level targeters, we could 
actually run 2.5 percent inflation for a decade, and we still wouldn’t be back on the price-level 
path that was established between 1995 and 2012. 
So you’ve got a lot of room here to be patient and to recenter inflation and inflation 
expectations at our 2 percent target, and you’ve got a lot of risk here that you’re going to push 
inflation low.  It’s going to take several years again to try to inch it back up to target. 
The risks of financial excess, which are sometimes cited around the table here as a reason 
to be more aggressive on rates, have also been mitigated somewhat by the recent selloff and 
related financial market turmoil.  So I think, because of that, there’s less urgency to raise rates on 
the basis of that argument, too. 
I’ll give you some examples of overreach of this Committee at the end of a tightening 
cycle.  One example that comes to mind is February 1995—a 50 basis point move at the end of a 
tightening cycle that had been very aggressive during 1994.  There was a lot of concern in the 
first part of 1995 that there would be a recession.  We skirted that recession and set up the 
economy for great performance in the second half of the 1990s—but only by the skin of our 
teeth, I think.  So that one worked out, we avoided the yield-curve inversion, and we stopped in 
time at that juncture. 
Spring 2006 also comes to mind.  There, again, you’re at the end of a tightening cycle.  
The Committee pressed on through the spring and didn’t stop until the funds rate was above 5 
percent in an environment in which housing was tumbling and the yield curve was inverting.  I 
December 18–19, 2018
153 of 242


 
 
 
already cited the Bernanke speech, at the beginning of his term, in which he downplayed the 
yield curve inversion and the signal that it was sending.  You know, obviously, the crisis was 
forming at that time. 
Some might say that there’s no rationale for stopping, because we’re not at neutral.  I 
think a lot of that is based on this Taylor (1999) rule logic, which I think has had overgrown 
influence on the Committee and the views of where neutral policy is.  If you modernize the 
Taylor rule by making some changes both with, I think, more accurate estimates of r* and with 
less feedback from the real economy to inflation to take into account the realities of the past 20 
years and also to have an inflation expectations gap instead of an actual inflation gap—if you 
make those modernizations to the rule, you will get something with a flat rate outlook over the 
forecast horizon.  So it’s not that hard, just on the basis of the kinds of considerations that have 
long been discussed around this table, to get to a realistic-looking Taylor-type rule that would tell 
you that we’re about where we need to be on rates, and that we do not need to press ahead—
especially in a situation in which it could backfire on us. 
So the first-best for today, I think, is alternative A.  And just say that we could possibly 
move in January, but we’d like to get some more data and see how the situation evolves.  
Especially, we can simply cite the fact that inflation’s lower than what we expected it to be at 
this point, and inflation expectations possibly are tailing off a little bit, so we’ll wait and see and 
go to the next meeting. 
The second-best would be to fix the language in alt-B.  Unfortunately, it may be beyond 
repair, in my view.  But let me suggest several things.  I think, in the first paragraph, on the 
statement about inflation, which is the second-to-last sentence here, I would take the language 
from alternative A, in which it says “both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food 
December 18–19, 2018
154 of 242


 
 
 
and energy have softened but remain near 2 percent.”  That would acknowledge that inflation 
readings have come in a little bit softer.  That would be a little bit more dovish here.  And, I 
think, appropriate to acknowledge—I think the first paragraph is supposed to be acknowledging 
facts as they come in, and I think that addition would be good. 
On the final sentence of paragraph 1—“Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations 
are little changed”—again, in light of the previous discussion, this is going to come off as tone 
deaf at this meeting for us to say that.  So I think, at a minimum, to be consistent with what I 
think the Committee thinks here, we should say “Survey-based indicators of longer-term 
inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.” 
Finally, in paragraph 2, the second sentence—“The Committee judges”—it says “the 
target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent.”  I think we should change that to “may 
be consistent.”  So, change “will” to “may.”  That would indicate that we are going to be data 
dependent as we go forward, and we’re not just blindly going to push ahead to a model-based 
conception of a neutral rate.  So I think that would help us a lot.  I think that, probably of all the 
changes I’ve suggested, that would do the most for us—a change to “may” from “will.” 
The third-best:  If you don’t want to make those changes to the statement, then I wouldn’t 
support the statement; I’d support alternative A.  And the third-best would be to say, “Leave the 
statement alone and let the Chair explain at the press conference.”  I think Jay is a great 
communicator.  I think he does a great job, and he’s totally prepared for all of the questions that 
are going to come in.  But I also think that the Committee has had bad experience putting too 
much on the Chair’s shoulders to explain things that aren’t actually in the statement, and the 
example I’m thinking of is that of June 2013.  That was the taper-tantrum meeting, at which the 
Committee didn’t make much change to the statement, but they expected Chair Bernanke to go 
December 18–19, 2018
155 of 242


 
 
 
out and explain what we were going to do.  I think he’s a great explainer as well, and he did the 
best he could.  But all of the explaining in the world won’t go very well if the statement comes 
off as too “hawkish” by itself. 
So I think our view should be that no amount of talking will take the place of what’s 
actually done with the statement.  So I think there’s some risk—only some risk, I think—that 
alternative B will come off as too “hawkish” here.  If it goes badly, no amount of talking will do.  
Markets may rightly interpret the FOMC as too “hawkish” for the current constellation of 
macroeconomic data.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Harker. 
MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  For much of this year, I’ve been on the fence as 
to whether three or four rate hikes would be appropriate.  For the year, economic activity has 
been a little stronger than I anticipated, but not overly so, and real GDP growth is tapering off, in 
line with most forecasts.  However, the recent deterioration in the outlook for foreign economies, 
the recent decline in inflation compensation, the decline in world equity markets, and increased 
volatility in U.S. equity markets lead me to favor no rate change for this meeting, and I support 
alternative A as written. 
I realize that the perception by many is that the funds rate remains below its neutral rate 
and that policy remains accommodative.  I am becoming increasingly skeptical of that view.  
Most macroeconomic theories I subscribe to imply that when policy is accommodative, 
especially over a significant period of time, this results in rising inflation rates.  Yet, over the 
past six years, year-over-year inflation at a quarterly frequency has averaged a mere 1.4 percent, 
with only three quarters in which it exceeded 2 percent.  I also have little worry that inflation will 
move much above its target. 
December 18–19, 2018
156 of 242


 
 
 
In light of that evidence, I am increasingly persuaded that policy is not very 
accommodative and that measures of the neutral funds rate may be biased upward.  Accordingly, 
I have lowered my assessment regarding the value of the neutral funds rate to be 2.25 percent in 
the short term and 2.75 percent over the medium term. 
Now, although my point forecasts for economic activity and inflation are consistent with 
the fulfillment of our dual mandate, there’s currently more economic uncertainty than was 
present earlier in the year.  Uncertainty regarding trade policy and asset prices represents 
significant economic headwinds.  Additionally, the overall strength of the global economy has 
waned, and stock markets have declined noticeably, particularly among most of our trading 
partners. 
Forecasts of current-quarter output have been consistently revised down, and the yield 
curve is dangerously close to inverting—perhaps indicating that future growth will be weaker 
than was anticipated earlier this year.  As well, the effects of fiscal policy appear to be waning, 
residential real estate looks very weak, and I am more inclined to believe that some of the first-
half economic strength was due to the moving of purchases forward in the expectation of higher 
tariffs.  The temporary tariff floor has the potential to significantly decrease investment as firms 
delay capital expenditures, preferring to ramp up when tariffs are reduced. 
All of these current and potential risks lead me to be more cautious in my view of 
appropriate policy, and I would prefer a more conservative approach to policy than is proposed 
in alternative B. 
I could possibly support a rate hike and the alternative B language if it included language 
that indicated a likely pause in interest rate normalization, perhaps, for example, amending 
paragraph 4, the first sentence, along the following lines:  “In determining whether further 
December 18–19, 2018
157 of 242


 
 
 
increases to the target range for the federal funds rate are merited,” et cetera.  Language along 
these lines would send a clear signal that the Committee is willing to be a bit more patient as it 
goes forward. 
Finally, I want to relate the view of my board of directors.  When I recommended no 
increase in the discount rate before their vote, there was an audible sigh of relief in the room, 
and, actually, a couple of people cheered.  I have never experienced this type of reaction in my 
more than six years as a director or as president of a Federal Reserve Bank.  And I think it just 
simply reflects the heightened sense of risks to the downside they are seeing, their nervousness, 
and their strong desire for a pause in our process of increasing rates.  I believe they are 
representative of many across the economy, and it’s a signal that I believe we should listen to 
and pay attention to. 
So in the spirit of the season and my colleague, President Bostic, I summarize my 
directors’ view by saying, “They really don’t want the Grinch to drain the punchbowl too 
quickly.”  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  In Homer’s The Odyssey [laughter], Odysseus 
survives and finds himself having to navigate his ship through the Strait of Messina, which lies 
between the Italian mainland and Sicily.  This was a notoriously treacherous passage, with the 
six-headed sea monster Scylla—the personification of a rock shoal—on one side and the monster 
Charybdis—the personification of a whirlpool—on the other side. 
Odysseus faced a difficult choice and chose to steer away from Charybdis so as not to 
lose his ship.  He ended up sailing a little too close to Scylla’s lair and lost six crewmen in the 
process.  But the ship was able to pass through and was saved, at least temporarily.  The ship was 
December 18–19, 2018
158 of 242


 
 
 
lost afterward when the crew offended the gods.  So it appears that soft landings have been hard 
to achieve for a very long time [laughter], and they entail making some very difficult decisions. 
With the funds rate nearing the range of estimates of its neutral value and with the risks 
surrounding the outlook, it’s likely to become harder to navigate policy in order to achieve a soft 
landing—avoiding the monster of tightening too aggressively, thereby curtailing the expansion, 
and the monster of being overly accommodative and allowing the economy to overheat, fostering 
macroeconomic and financial instabilities and potentially damaging the structural aspects of the 
economy, like productivity growth.  But for today, while a case can be made for pausing to 
assess economic and financial conditions and the risks to the forecast, I think there’s also a case 
for moving the funds rate up today and explaining that we will be assessing conditions as we go 
forward.  And this looks like the consensus view in the market. 
Now, this is a judgment call that involves one’s view on current economic and financial 
conditions, the outlook and risks, and the signals we might be sending via action or inaction 
today.  To me, the case for moving today is the more compelling one, and I support increasing 
the target range of the federal funds rate 25 basis points. 
I’m comfortable with the language in alternative B.  I believe the revision to paragraph 2 
that now mentions that we’re monitoring global economic and financial developments is a good 
one.  In view of the volatility in markets and the turn in investor sentiment, I think it would be 
remiss not to mention these factors. 
With regard to our communications, with the uncertainty surrounding the outlook and the 
associated appropriate policy rate path, I think it’s particularly unfortunate that we find ourselves 
in a situation in which we have to try to signal something by changing a word or two in the 
statement rather than being more explicit about what we’re trying to convey.  As I mentioned at 
December 18–19, 2018
159 of 242


 
 
 
previous meetings, I believe we should try to include more information in the statement about the 
Committee’s consensus outlook and how changes in the incoming data, which we discuss in the 
first paragraph, relate to that outlook.  If we were better at explaining our outlook and policy 
rationale, we could rely less on subtle word changes—such as replacing “expects” with “judges,” 
as in alternative B—which can be interpreted differently than anticipated. 
Explaining how the incoming data have affected the economic outlook would clarify 
what we mean when we say we’re going to be data dependent and help avoid conveying the 
notion that we’re going to be highly sensitive to month-to-month variations in economic or 
financial data or very discretionary in setting monetary policy. 
Now, the Chair’s more-frequent press conferences are a very useful addition to Federal 
Reserve communications.  But the statement is the communication of the Committee, and I think 
we should do all we can to ensure that it’s as effective as possible.  Perhaps the subcommittee on 
communications can take up the project of statement rehabilitation in the coming year.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Bostic. 
MR. BOSTIC.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a 25 basis point increase in the 
target range of the federal funds rate.  Economic conditions today are strong, warranting a 
continued removal of accommodation.  However, I’m less supportive of the statement as 
articulated in alternative B.  And regarding the statement, there are at least three objectives:  
describe our sense of current economic conditions; explain and/or justify the announced policy 
action; and provide some picture of the future.  While I’m comfortable this statement succeeds in 
the first two goals, I have concerns about how well it accomplishes the third. 
December 18–19, 2018
160 of 242


 
 
 
My concern centers on the tone of the statement and a fear that we will be seen as being 
out of touch if we don’t hit the right note.  The SEP now indicates a median of two, rather than 
three, 25 basis point increases in 2019.  Furthermore, virtually every person here has dialed back 
their outlook and policy rate path, and many have admitted that the uncertainty associated with 
both is elevated. 
In light of this, I think there are two questions to be faced.  The first is whether the 
statement should acknowledge this shift.  And, second, if the answer to that question is “yes,” 
what is the best way to accomplish this?  For me, the answer to the first question is “yes.”  My 
directors and business contacts almost universally expressed the view that growing uncertainty 
has made prospects for 2019 unclear.  This is the first on-the-quarter meeting since I have been 
in this role at which directors on the Atlanta board and across our five Branches were conflicted 
about the direction of policy.  Now, helped in part by our effective forward guidance in the past, 
tallies for recommended policy actions are typically unanimous or close to it.  However, this 
time, the vote in the field was 15 “raise” and 14 “hold.”  They were really conflicted. 
My directors in Atlanta were comfortable with increasing the rate today only with an 
assurance given by me that the Committee appreciated this changing landscape and would 
incorporate this perspective into future policy considerations.  They would not have supported 
this action otherwise. 
Regarding the second question, on the “how,” I’m uncertain whether the proposed 
language in paragraph 2 of alternative B adequately conveys this sentiment.  I worry that simply 
replacing “expects” with “judges” is too subtle and may be misinterpreted, and that “some” was 
always implied, as “increases” is plural. 
December 18–19, 2018
161 of 242


 
 
 
In addition, I am not sure that the last sentence—though it adds some hint of 
uncertainty—is sufficiently direct in making the key point, which is that policy decisions as we 
move forward will no longer be slam-dunk obvious.  Conversations with my directors and 
business contacts over recent weeks have left me with a concern that a statement like this may 
not be well received. 
I know there’s been a lot of discussion of changes in specific language, and I’ve been 
involved in a bit of those myself.  And I realize that wordsmithing in a committee context is 
difficult and uncomfortable.  All of that said, I am on the fence about whether I believe that what 
we have here is adequate.  I will say I have some sympathy for President Mester’s perspective 
that we consider including the actual path language today, and I also have sympathy for 
President Bullard’s suggestion that we change “will” to “may.”  Suggestions like these were 
discussed among my team and my directors, and there was some support for both of them. 
However the Committee decides to go, one truth is that the press conference will take on 
heightened significance.  The message coming from the press conference will have to match the 
message of these SEP submissions and the statement, mixed in with some notion for the 
Committee’s tone and temperament.  The press conference is a key opportunity to clarify and 
sharpen the Committee’s assessment of the likely future path of the economy and of policy—and 
also to reveal important nuances that are present in the statement.  I thought the Chairman’s 
remarks regarding risks and uncertainty during the economy go-round this morning were on-
point and would be a good way to start that program this afternoon. 
I have a final comment on the role of the SEP more generally.  At our board meeting, 
there was increased confusion about what the dot plot is intended to convey now that we are 
close to a neutral policy stance.  Taking into account where policy is today, point estimates carry 
December 18–19, 2018
162 of 242


 
 
 
more significance than they did 12 months ago, though the dot plot is more of a mechanical 
mechanism than a unified collective decision.  And, consequently, I think there would be great 
value in reviewing our communication tools regarding this.  More generally, I wonder if it would 
be appropriate to revisit our whole set of communication tools, including the SEP, in the near 
future.  And this may be something for our communications subcommittee to look at.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support today’s policy decision, 
alternative B.  I’m very comfortable with the changes in the language in the statement.  I think 
the “monitoring” language added in paragraph 2 is quite good. 
I will just mention that, with regard to the inflation situation and the discussion of 
inflation expectations, to be clear, I’m not sure I ever go out and give a speech or public 
comments in which I don’t emphasize the importance of our symmetric inflation objective.  So 
maintaining our credibility on hitting inflation is very important.  Having said that, I agree with 
the commentary of Thomas Laubach and Vice Chair Williams.  I think the situation today is very 
different than in the past, when we relied on pointing out changes in inflation expectations.  We 
were very far below our inflation objective at that time.  I thought it was actually useful to use 
that language.  But today we’re much closer.  And even though I want to make sure we stay at 
2 percent, I think that the risks are pretty good there. 
I would like to spend a little time spelling out my monetary policy strategy for the 
coming year.  In retrospect, our gradual pace of funds rate increases has been appropriate, 
particularly in light of the downside risks to our inflation mandate.  But with those low-inflation 
risks largely abated and in the absence of a major downside shock to demand, policy eventually 
December 18–19, 2018
163 of 242


 
 
 
will have to take on a modestly restrictive stance to return output and the unemployment rate to 
their long-run normal rates in a measured fashion.  My appropriate policy rate path reflects my 
assumption that a funds rate in the 3 to 3.25 percent range, when compared with our 2.75 percent 
assumption for the long-run neutral rate, will be restrictive enough to bring about this soft 
landing. 
Now, I’m just going to pause and say I’m going to refer to the “star” variables, r* and u*, 
and I continue to think that they’re useful.  I can change my story and say exactly the same thing 
in terms of data dependence and judging the incoming data and whether the economy and 
inflation are going to be in line with my funds-rate setting.  This is just economical jargon—I 
mean “economical” in the sense of efficient language in order to get the point across.  It’s a little 
bit more objective than just a hunch, but it is a hunch, in view of all of the uncertainties that we 
have.  So it’s convenient. 
The recent changes in financial conditions have not altered my view that short-run r* is 
slightly above its longer-run level, but I expect it to move down as fiscal stimulus wanes.  So I 
continue to think it will be appropriate to move the policy rate into the 3 to 3.25 percent range by 
the end of 2019.  Accordingly, after a federal funds rate increase today, I have three rate hikes in 
2019 and, thereafter, hold the funds rate steady through 2021.  This is the same rate path as in my 
September SEP submission.  I agree that the downside risks have increased since September, but 
I think we need to keep our perspective.  The real-side data are still strong.  And, as the Tealbook 
discusses today, indexes of aggregate financial market conditions and foreign growth prospects 
have deteriorated only modestly—for example, much less than in 2015 and 2016. 
It’s also unclear how much of the recent financial market developments is a fundamental 
reassessment of the 2019–21 prospects.  How much of this is noise, and how much is market 
December 18–19, 2018
164 of 242


 
 
 
participants taking on board a slowing in activity along the lines of that in our baseline 
projection?  After all, until now, we had been somewhat surprised how little financial market 
conditions had tightened as we’ve removed accommodation.  Perhaps they caught up. 
In sum, while downside risks have increased somewhat, I don’t think they dictate a 
material change in the baseline outlook.  And I’m personally reluctant to infer yet that these 
developments support signaling a lower path of the funds rate than I already had in September.  
Of course, this could be wrong, and we could be facing more fundamental changes in financial 
conditions and sentiment that could put a bigger dent in aggregate demand. 
I think my terminal funds rate range of 3 to 3.25 percent allows for a flexible response.  
This is the median rate path of the SEP in 2020 and ’21.  If conditions remain uncertain, I could 
see supporting a pause in rate hikes after today.  If it then turns out that we are simply in the 
midst of our expected slowdown toward potential output growth in 2020, it could be appropriate 
to raise rates still three times next year.  If we instead find ourselves in the midst of a more 
precipitous slowdown, we would forgo those later increases or, if necessary, cut rates to provide 
more accommodation.  
I’m a strong supporter of data dependence and risk management, but I don’t think that 
recent developments are yet severe enough to tilt us from the median rate path for ’20-’21.  And, 
again, I think the “monitoring” language of paragraph 2 is useful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Barkin. 
MR. BARKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I’m comfortable with alternative B.  The 
economy is still strong.  With the data evolving almost exactly as we expected and real rates still 
low, I see no good reason to deviate from our articulated policy rate path.  To my mind, the risk 
of overheating is still elevated relative to the risk of excessive restraint. 
December 18–19, 2018
165 of 242


 
 
 
You asked us to comment on how statement language could evolve over time.  It seems 
natural for the next step to involve substituting for “will” a word such as “ might” or “could”—
language that, I’m told, harkens back to the FOMC of yore.  [Laughter]  I wasn’t here.  Then we 
could evolve to dropping the clause, while using the balance of risks as a forward indicator. 
More important to me than the particular wording of the statement will be to 
communicate to the public, as I said yesterday, that we still see a healthy economy now and as 
we go forward, and that 2.3 percent SEP growth is still above trend.  I think that is a point on 
which people get confused. 
On the path of monetary policy as we go forward, I found the Chair’s analogy of walking 
through a dark room useful.  In particular, it made me want to think through how to find a 
flashlight.  Put differently, because monetary policy works with a lag—and presuming for a 
second that we all have confirmation bias—we should discuss how to make data dependence 
operational.  Two thoughts:  First, I like what Governor Clarida said on using data to inform our 
assessment of what constitutes neutral policy—as opposed to using data to inform recession 
probability, which we know we’re not very good at.  As I said last time, I could imagine a higher 
neutral rate than many others’ estimates, but for me, that’s critically dependent on continued 
growth and productivity, which, I believe, in turn requires continued business investment.  So 
I’m watching closely business investment and its translation to productivity. 
Second, as we think about operationalizing “data dependence,” we should make sure that 
the public’s understanding of that term includes “environmental dependence”—in view of the 
uncertainties that we face.  The relevant aspects of the environment vary over time, but at the 
moment, I’m focused on fiscal policy, lending conditions, and the trade situation.  The first two 
December 18–19, 2018
166 of 242


 
 
 
have been putting upward pressure on the appropriate level of short-term rates, while trade is 
mainly a risk at this point but with the potential to exert downward pressure on the neutral rate. 
Over the next year, it is easy to imagine scenarios in which this balance could shift in 
either direction, and I imagine our decisions could very well shift accordingly.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  As we discussed yesterday, despite recent financial 
turbulence, the economy continues to expand strongly, and the data have come in consistent with 
my expected outlook. 
With the economy at or beyond full employment and inflation near our objective, our 
goal now is to maintain the expansion on a sustainable path.  The gradual path of increases in the 
federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we’ve 
proceeded.  That approach remains appropriate for the modal outlook.  But we’re not on a preset 
course, and the policy rate path will depend on how the actual outlook evolves. 
I want to make three brief points:  first, about what we’re doing today; second, about how 
our communications should evolve; and, third, on the balance sheet.  First, with ongoing 
momentum in the domestic economy and further fiscal outlays still in the pipeline, the modal 
outlook is for above-trend growth—albeit at a somewhat slower pace—to continue into next 
year, which would warrant continuing our gradual path of rate increases next year.  If, however, 
financial conditions tighten materially further and downside risks materialize—such as those 
associated with an escalation of the trade conflict with China, for instance—then we should be 
prepared to alter the path.  At this point, I consider this to be a risk, rather than my baseline 
expectation. 
December 18–19, 2018
167 of 242


 
 
 
The Dickensian disconnect between the strong data on the real economy and the risk-off 
sentiment in financial markets makes communications particularly challenging at this meeting.  
On the one hand, we want to express appropriate confidence in the economic outlook, which is 
grounded in solid fundamentals and validated by recent data.  On the other hand, we want to 
demonstrate that we are attentive to the risk-off sentiment in financial markets and the downside 
risks of trade conflict and moderation in foreign growth.  I believe alternative B, as currently 
written, achieves that balance. 
Similarly—and this is the second point—we’re trying to signal that a shift is under way 
toward data dependence and away from forward guidance.  As we go forward, it will be 
important to combine the second and third paragraphs in a formulation that allows us to move 
away from forward guidance entirely.  And that is most likely to work at a meeting in which we 
actually increase rates.  An interim step at a meeting in which the federal funds rate is not 
increased would be to add the kind of sentence that Thomas mentioned, which we used 
previously to talk about data dependence.  It could subsequently be dropped when we take that 
final step on dropping forward guidance, because, as President Daly pointed out, paragraph 4 
does that work on a kind of ongoing, “evergreen” basis. 
At this meeting, the Chair’s press conference, bolstered by changes in the statement and 
the SEP, provides the opportunity to carefully message that mixture of confidence coupled with 
vigilance.  As we go forward, I see a value to buttressing the “every meeting” frequency of press 
conferences with updates to the SEP to help reinforce the greater data dependence on the part of 
the Committee and help flesh out how Committee participants are incorporating new data into 
their policy rate paths more frequently.  That might be particularly valuable as the cadence, and 
perhaps even direction, of policy adjustments become more variable.  In my recent discussions 
December 18–19, 2018
168 of 242


 
 
 
with market participants, they did cite the staleness of the SEP numbers as a factor that 
undermines the clarity of our communications. 
Third and finally, it’s worth noting in passing that the updating of balance sheet estimates 
has a modest effect on my assessment of the appropriate path of the policy rate in the medium 
term.  On the basis of the market survey of the demand for reserves and staff projections of a 
prudent buffer, I’m expecting the level of reserves to normalize at a higher level than I had 
previously assumed.  Using previous staff models suggests that an upward revision to the size of 
the balance sheet of the expected magnitude equates to a somewhat lower increase in the term 
premium—probably worth around 10 to 20 basis points on the term premium. 
With that said, I support alternative B as written.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  As I discussed yesterday, I’m increasingly 
concerned about downside risks as we head into 2019, and I’ve been agonized or ambivalent 
about whether we should take action today.  However, I could support, and I am supportive of, 
raising the federal funds rate today, as long as the increase is accompanied by appropriate 
language in the statement and in the press conference. 
I hope—and I’ll come to the statement last—in the press conference as well as in the 
statement, we will emphasize that we are vigilant and very aware of, and monitoring, these 
potential downside risks.  As the Chairman mentioned, the three in particular I would comment 
on would be (a) weakness in interest-sensitive industries, (b) strains in credit markets and a 
tightening of financial conditions, and (c) challenges to global growth. 
I would emphasize that we will avoid being rigid or predetermined regarding the future 
path of rates, and, third, that we’re going to be patient and we have the luxury and some 
December 18–19, 2018
169 of 242


 
 
 
flexibility to be patient in light of recent inflation trends.  Such patience would allow sufficient 
time for some of these weaknesses and uncertainties to be resolved. 
With that, I would be supportive of a couple of the statements on the language that were 
suggested by Presidents Bostic and Bullard.  In fact, we submitted similar comments.  Number 
one, I would be sympathetic to changing the word “will” to “may.”  And I would also be 
supportive of changing “increases” to “increase.”  I don’t think “increases” constrains us, but I 
would still make that edit also. 
I also am sympathetic to the comments that Governor Brainard just made about changing 
the frequency of the SEP to go along with the frequency of the press conference.  Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Daly. 
MS. DALY.  Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Now, let me start by saying I’ve changed my 
holiday plans this year after this meeting, and they involve now rereading the classics of fiction 
[laughter] so that I can be part of the team on this. 
But back to today.  I support alternative B as written, and I appreciate the language added 
on my Saturday—probably everybody else’s Saturday, too—on monitoring global economic and 
financial developments and their effect on the economy.  I think that actually helps solve some of 
the tone-deaf problems that I was worried about, as President Bostic mentioned, and also just 
signals to the public that we’re paying attention to this. 
In thinking about the 25 basis point rate increase incorporated into alternative B, like 
President Bostic’s, my boards of directors—I went on a whirlwind tour of the Branches and the 
head office—were extraordinarily skeptical of this move.  They thought this was—well, “crazy” 
was one of the words that was used.  But it was largely because there’s a confusion about how 
December 18–19, 2018
170 of 242


 
 
 
far away from a neutral stance we are and how fast real GDP growth has been relative to 
potential growth.  And, despite the numerous times we talked to them about this, I think that 
confusion persists.  So when I explained it to them that way, I got unanimous support for this, 
and that was helpful, and it’s basically the way I think about it. 
With regard to alternative B as written, it’s because of this:  The economy continues to 
grow above trend.  Labor markets are pushing further beyond full employment, with continued 
firming in wages and the diminishment of slack in any capacity.  I expect core inflation to be 
very near our 2 percent goal throughout most of 2019, and, by my estimate, we’re still—well, not 
well below, but we’re still below a neutral stance of policy.  So removing that accommodation is 
important to getting us to a sustained pace of growth. 
But, of course, we’re also in the midst of a risk-off phase in financial markets, which 
everyone’s mentioned, and we have increased spreads on riskier debt and a selloff in equity 
markets.  And this greater-than-expected tightening in financial conditions right now, as well as 
the gloomier mood or the gloomier sentiment, has, in my opinion, amplified our actions to rein in 
the economy.  So we’re getting assistance from these places in ways that I didn’t expect. 
Now, part of this, as President Evans has mentioned, is that I was surprised at how slow 
to respond financial conditions were when we undertook previous rate increases.  They look to 
have caught up and even over–caught up, and what’s uncertain to me right now is whether they 
will persist in this accelerated or exaggerated point or whether this is just a catch-up, and now 
we’ll go back to something that’s more historically normal. 
So as I think about those things, this muddies the water about the future path of 
appropriate policy.  And I think that is currently well conveyed in alternative B, because it could 
be that these things disappear, they’re temporary, we go back to where we were before the 
December 18–19, 2018
171 of 242


 
 
 
financial selloff, and we need to go back to something like three.  Or it could be that they 
continue, our efforts are amplified, and we need something like two or one.  So I think that right 
now, alternative B as written is conveying that potential likelihood or that chance. 
If the data come in as expected, my forecast calls for two rate increases in 2019 and 
another in 2020.  This gets us to a path with a neutral stance next year, at least by my estimate.  I 
have the neutral rate at 0.75.  But in view of the uncertain nature of r* and u*, as Governor 
Clarida noted, and the uncertainty about whether the financial market tightening will persist or 
continue to get even tighter or relax a bit, I think patience is warranted.  If the self-bridling 
factors persist, as they have up to now, then our patience will be warranted, and we can push the 
rate increases off until the latter part of next year.  But if this recedes, then we can remove our 
patience and move as needed. 
Mostly, I want to finish by saying that this really does emphasize data dependence.  I 
think I—with my board, and in general—shifted my thoughts from “We need to march back to 
neutral at a gradual pace, ensuring that we’re keeping our eye on the economy” to “Data 
dependence is extremely important, because we don’t actually know how much our actions are 
amplified.”  We’re also facing shocks that have some uncertainty.  And both of those factors 
make me more highly data dependent than I might have been a year ago. 
Finally, since I think President Barkin and I are the only two who did this, I would like to 
comment on the future language.  As the policy rate approaches neutral, language along the lines 
of alternative A seems quite plausible to me and quite suitable, in that it’s consistent with a pause 
in normalization and it could accommodate movements in the rate either way, down or up.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Bowman. 
December 18–19, 2018
172 of 242


 
 
 
MS. BOWMAN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B as written.  The 
information that’s been presented on the economy indicates that inflation and inflation 
expectations appear to be very close to target and stable.  We continue to see growth in job 
creation, steady employment, and strong consumer spending, with a continued slowing in 
residential investment likely resulting from the increase in borrowing costs. 
Although it’s challenging to determine in this post-crisis environment what the new 
normal is and what the new neutral rate is, I believe current data could indicate that we are very 
close to what could be considered a neutral rate.  Consequently, in my view, it may be an 
opportune time, as well as prudent, to consider observing the effect of the Committee’s cycle of 
tightening on the overall economy.  With the inflation rate close to our target and employment 
holding steady below the assumed natural rate, taking time to monitor the effect of the 
Committee’s actions would provide some perspective from which we could conduct an analysis 
of economic conditions without the expectation of further immediate or pending actions.  This 
could provide us with the opportunity to consider and determine the appropriate pace of future 
actions as warranted by available data indicating changes to conditions. 
While the national economic information provides evidence of a continued strong and 
growing economy, there are areas that weigh on my assessment, as I noted in my comments 
yesterday regarding residential real estate investment, agriculture, and the labor market.  Further, 
there appears to be an undercurrent in the business community of unease or concern about future 
conditions, as has been indicated by many others over the past two days.  While data do not 
currently reflect this concern, business sentiment seems to be less positive than the data indicate 
and could result in slower business investment and, in turn, become data for our future 
decisionmaking. 
December 18–19, 2018
173 of 242


 
 
 
As many have also noted, there is much uncertainty in the global economy.  It will be 
important to watch and monitor global events to determine effects and influences on our 
economic conditions.  This will help us consider appropriate further action in light of 
circumstances as they continue to evolve. 
The effects of fiscal and trade policy may also influence the timing and consideration of 
future actions over the coming months.  And, while I believe it is appropriate to observe the 
effects following an action if we raise rates today, it’s important to note that data will continue to 
drive my assessment and thoughts on future actions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today I support alternative B as written, 
although I must confess that, perhaps for the first time since I joined this Committee in 2011, I 
found myself drawn to alternative A. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Wow.  [Laughter] 
MS. GEORGE.  That said, raising the funds rate at this meeting is expected by markets 
and can be supported by an outlook that points to above-trend growth and a very strong, if not 
tight, labor market pushing, perhaps, the limits of its long-run sustainable level. 
But today’s choice feels a bit like some of my commutes to work when you approach an 
intersection just as the traffic light goes from green to yellow.  If I’m running late, I’ll accelerate 
to get through the light before it turns red.  And then there are other times when I’m more 
patient, slow down, and wait for the next green light.  I see several factors that collectively 
suggest that exercising patience may be appropriate at this juncture.  We’ve been raising rates 
gradually, but materially, over the past few years while also juggling an unprecedented balance 
sheet reduction.  The effects of this tightening are working their way through the economy. 
December 18–19, 2018
174 of 242


 
 
 
As I highlighted in yesterday’s go-round, this tightening is taking place as inflation has 
softened over the past three months; commodity and financial markets, along with global 
purchasing managers indexes (PMIs), point toward a slowing in global demand; and the potential 
for further disinflationary pressures seems likely.  Although labor markets continue to tighten, 
data have yet to provide fullcorroboration of anecdotes that suggest significant wage pressures. 
Against this backdrop for the outlook, I’ve lowered my estimate of the appropriate policy 
rate path.  While I continue to see some further increases in the funds rate as appropriate, 
economic conditions give us the latitude, I think, to wait and see the full effect of past tightening 
as well as how incoming data and risk unfold.  In order to communicate the need for that kind of 
flexibility, I would like to see future statements back away further from forward guidance.  
Today’s language provides an important qualifier about global economic and financial 
developments, and I would support further changes in meetings ahead.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Governor Quarles. 
MR. QUARLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support today’s proposed increase.  I’m 
comfortable with the language in alternative B, including the new language on risks. 
Now, my September SEP submission did not include a rate increase at this meeting.  I 
thought that a slower pace—even though, I believe, to a somewhat more distant destination than 
many other members of the Committee—would have been a good indicator of our gradualism.  
In light of current conditions in financial markets and the discussion around this table yesterday 
and today, a lesser man might have said—but I am bigger than that [laughter], and I can easily 
support this hike, because moving now relative to January or March doesn’t seem that material.  
Data on the real economy are strong, and financial markets are volatile and can change direction 
December 18–19, 2018
175 of 242


 
 
 
quickly.  And many of the important macroeconomic relationships operate with long and 
variable lags. 
I had three hikes in 2019.  I’ve shifted one into this year, and that leaves two for next 
year.  After that, I see continued gradual hikes through 2020—a path consistent with my view 
that potential growth is picking up somewhat, despite the diligent efforts of the Vice Chairman to 
persuade me otherwise, and that there remains some space between the current stance of policy 
and the point at which monetary policy will no longer be accommodative. 
I also support the change in the forward-guidance language in the statement.  As policy 
moves toward neutral, at least from the perspective of many on the Committee, we’ll have to rely 
more on our assessment of the state of the economy to communicate our policy stance—which is 
to say that we’ll have to be more data dependent. 
Now, communicating data dependence could be challenging, especially if we don’t want 
to appear to be too discretionary in our policymaking.  So it would be clearest if we defined what 
data we are dependent on and how we depended on them—which is to say, if we adopted a 
monetary policy rule.  But in my still-brief time on the Committee, I am coming to see that the 
real heuristic benefits of a strict rule are as much about ignoring some data as they are about 
paying attention to specific data, and the complexity and evolving nature of the economy argue 
for the consideration of a wide range of indicators in assessing the state of the economy. 
The many “pros” around this table will see this as a sign of growing maturity.  [Laughter]  
It feels very much like a loss of innocence.  [Laughter]  And at Christmas.  But this complicates 
the communication of data dependence.  So I would prefer a framework for our communications 
in which we make it clear that we’re focused on broad trends and on sustained changes.  Five of 
you have begged me not to say it, so I won’t—but just simply be clear that we are not reacting to 
December 18–19, 2018
176 of 242


 
 
 
every piece of volatile data.  We shouldn’t give the impression that data dependence means that 
every miss on the labor report will be met with a shift in the path of the policy rate. 
So, picking up on President Barkin’s suggestion of thinking about how, practically, you 
do this, practically maybe this would entail a communications focus on the behavior of longer-
run averages rather than individual spot data points.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 
MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If I might, I wanted to start by adding my 
thanks to David Wilcox.  I met David when I was at Treasury, in the early days of the financial 
crisis.  He was deputy director here, at the Division of Research and Statistics, and there were 
many times—morning, late at night, or weekends—when I’d call him and say, “We need help.”  
And David was just a great partner, marshaling the resources of the Federal Reserve.  So I 
appreciate working with you all of these years, David.  And thank you for supporting the 
Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Minneapolis Fed.  You were a big help in 
getting that launched.  I look forward to what you do next. 
Mr. Chairman, turning to the topic at hand, I argued at the previous meeting that we 
should pause rate increases.  The intermeeting data, for me, leave me increasingly convinced that 
that’s the right approach today.  Therefore, I favor alternative A.  The reasons are, number one, I 
think slack likely remains in the labor market, as evidenced by just a little slowdown in job 
growth and modest nominal wage growth.  As long as inflation remains subdued and wage 
growth seems reasonable, I think we should continue to provide some accommodation to support 
ongoing job and wage growth.  Pausing on rate hikes will allow the effects of past increases to 
work their way through the economy.  I think we’ve got a lot in the pipeline and that we have to 
see what the effect will be. 
December 18–19, 2018
177 of 242


 
 
 
We would expect rate increases to strengthen the dollar, to reduce momentum in the 
housing market, and to damp investment.  I think we’re seeing some evidence of all of those 
things.  I think that we’re also learning as we’re going the effect of the balance sheet runoff on 
credit spreads and other parts of the economy.  So I think there’s a lot to learn by pausing. 
The main counterargument is that there’s a risk of getting behind the curve on inflation.  
However, as others have noted, inflation has recently softened, and option-based risk-neutral 
probabilities indicate that inflation risks are currently tilted to the downside, not the upside.  So I 
think pausing will give us time to make a better assessment of all of these things and, most 
important for me, how much slack remains in the labor market. 
You know, in the discussion yesterday, I found it really helpful that the staff analyzed 
possible explanations for why the SEP is so different from the baseline forecast.  Obviously, the 
first argument is slack, and I’ve been arguing that for a long time.  That resonates with me;  I 
think there’s still slack in the labor market.  But it dawned on me, as I was thinking last night 
about the meeting discussion, that there’s a problem with the slack argument, and the problem is, 
it leads me to repeat the same mistake.  So let’s say, three months ago, if I said we’re at 
maximum employment and then the job market exceeds my expectations, what do I think today?  
I think, well, we must be closer.  So that argument leads us to repeatedly say, “Well, we must be 
closer to maximum employment,” and, in a sense, to double down on that view. 
What was interesting to me about yesterday’s presentation was the second explanation, 
which was that even if we use up so-called slack, it may not be inflationary.  And I think that’s 
something that we need to take very seriously.  I’m not saying that we’re Japan, but Japan has a 
very tight labor market by almost any measurement, and yet they’re not seeing high wage 
growth, and they’re not seeing high inflation.  I think we need to be open to that possibility that 
December 18–19, 2018
178 of 242


 
 
 
this notion—that, well, we’re running out of capacity and it’s about to trigger inflation—may not 
be true.  And there might be more potential in the economy, or at least inflation expectations may 
be keeping the inflation genie in a bottle.  So I’m open to learning that, and I appreciate the 
staff’s presentation yesterday. 
With regard, lastly, to the forward-guidance discussion, I think forward guidance is most 
powerful when it’s used sparingly and when we have a high degree of confidence regarding what 
the path is going to be.  And for me, I think we’re at a point at which I don’t have a high degree 
of confidence.  I, frankly, don’t have a high degree of confidence that the next move necessarily 
should be up versus down.  I think we’re pretty close to neutral today, so I would be in favor of 
removing forward guidance and then putting it back in our pocket for when we really need it.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  Vice Chair Williams. 
VICE CHAIRMAN WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as 
written.  My comments about the economy are very close to President Evans’s.  I did not look at 
his notes.  He’s too far away from me.  [Laughter]  But I have very much the same view. 
Economic activity continues to grow well above potential, the labor market is very 
strong, inflation is close to our longer-run target, and the funds rate is below my estimate of its 
neutral value.  So, against such a backdrop, a 25 basis point hike in the target range for the 
federal funds rate at this meeting is justified.  In tandem with this action, a 20 basis point 
increase in the IOER rate should keep the federal funds rate trading comfortably within the target 
range—that is, if the Board is so inclined, of course. 
As I noted, in response to tightening financial conditions, slowing global growth, and a 
more pessimistic outlook for the housing sector, I have lowered my projection of U.S. real GDP 
December 18–19, 2018
179 of 242


 
 
 
growth.  I have also taken down my projection of core inflation a touch.  And, consistent with 
these changes in the outlook, I now foresee a somewhat shallower funds rate path, with the target 
range peaking at 3 to 3.25 percent. 
With today’s actions, a change in forward-guidance language in alternative B represents 
an appropriate step in moving away from the strong explicit guidance toward a more data-
dependent posture.  In addition, the language indicating that we’ll be monitoring global 
economic and financial developments recognizes the meaningful swing in market sentiment, and 
that we are highly attuned to potential shifts in the economic outlook. 
Now, many have made very good comments about the challenge that we and, obviously, 
the Chair face in communicating these two, in a way, difficult stories.  One is very strong data, 
and the other is concerns about the outlook and risks to the outlook. 
I think, again, I view the statement as doing a very good job of trying to get the right 
balance, and I’m sure the Chair’s comments will build on that.  I think we have to be very 
cautious here not to signal an overly pessimistic view of the economic outlook.  There is a risk 
that if we push too hard on this, people will view that we have inside information or somehow a 
much more negative view of the economic outlook than is represented even in the SEP. 
The conversation here yesterday and today was, I think, very consistent with the 
economic projections, which imply a relatively modest tweaking of our outlook along with a 
lower funds rate path.  The SEP assessment of risks did not show a major shift there around 
either the tilt of uncertainty or the amount of uncertainty.  And I think we want to make sure that 
we calibrate this message as best we can, that the outlook has changed modestly, and that the 
path for policy has also changed in a very data-dependent, reaction-function way, but that we 
have not fundamentally changed our view of where the economy is or where it’s going. 
December 18–19, 2018
180 of 242


 
 
 
I don’t think we’re going to ever get this perfect.  I think this is just hard to do in one 
page.  I think it’s even hard to do in a single press conference.  But I think all of us, over the next 
weeks and months, can play an important role in getting out there this much more nuanced 
picture of the economy. 
Next year, we will, at some point, need to restructure paragraphs 2 and 3 so that it reflects 
a purely data-dependent approach.  Again, I’m not reading President Mester’s comments, but I 
agree with all of them—about how she described this.  Also, Governor Brainard made similar 
comments. 
I think it’s important—and on this, I will push back a little bit against Thomas’s 
presentation about, maybe we could tweak this language one way or another down the road.  And 
I actually agree with President Kashkari here, too.  At some point, we’re just losing confidence 
in a very strong, explicit forward guidance.  When we do that, I don’t think we really want to put 
on more and more adjectives, adverbs, and caveats and hang on lots of bells and whistles.  I think 
the best thing to do there is to remove that forward guidance but, importantly, do exactly what 
President Mester, Governor Brainard, and others have said, which is, replace that with a very 
strong statement of our views about the economy and our policy. 
I think that there are three key features that paragraphs 2 and 3 should have.  One is, it 
should have a summary of the important features of our economic outlook.  Right now, we’re not 
really doing that, even in alt-A.  I was reading the alt-A as like a future statement.  I don’t think it 
captures, what are the big features of our outlook?  What are the risks to the outlook?  How does 
it relate to our dual-mandate goals?  Second, we want to position our policy decision squarely in 
the context of that outlook.  And, finally, we want to emphasize the data dependence of our 
future decisions in our statements. 
December 18–19, 2018
181 of 242


 
 
 
A little footnote on this—I actually would leave paragraph 4 alone.  My view is, 
paragraph 4 is—I don’t like to use this word—“quasi-constitutional.”  But it is the link to our 
longer-run goals and policy strategy statement.  So as long as that statement stays in place, I 
think paragraph 4 is the link between the decisions we’re making and the views we have to our 
longer-run strategy.  So if we’re going to modify our views about future monetary policy actions, 
it should be in this idea of this new paragraph, “2-slash-3.”  And this is not something that I think 
we need to do soon, but I do think it would be very helpful if, in future discussions, we think 
about how to create a new and better statement. 
Finally, on the idea of having an SEP prepared every round, I think it would be very 
helpful to the Chair in terms of the press conferences.  I actually think it’s also helpful for our 
discussions.  I am worried about the “unfunded mandate” argument, both for the staff and for us.  
So my own proposal would be that we try an experiment in which we have a very simplified SEP 
that we prepare just internally, at least initially, which has the basic forecast table and maybe one 
question, “Has your outlook fundamentally changed since your previous SEP submission?”  This 
would be the in-between ones—the January, for example.  That would reduce the amount of time 
people had to put into it and would really just focus on the question:  Has anything really 
changed in the past six weeks, and, if so, what? 
I think it serves two purposes.  One is, most of the time, nothing really happens in six 
weeks—you may add a tenth or subtract a tenth—so it’s just good to say, “Okay, things are 
basically the same.”  But 10 percent of the time or so, things do change.  We just experienced 
one of those instances.  And I think having the SEP available at this meeting was really 
important for communicating our views on the economy and monetary policy.  So I think having 
December 18–19, 2018
182 of 242


 
 
 
that in the maybe rare times when the outlook changes in six weeks—having that internally and 
having that for the Chair as backdrop—would be really useful.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thank you.  And thanks to everybody.  Particularly, thanks to 
those of you who did provide your thoughts on forward guidance as we go forward.  I appreciate 
that, and I think there’s just a lot of useful thinking in that.  You know, you can envision future, 
less fraught press conferences when we can ultimately get to a point at which we don’t know 
whether the next move is up or down, and so the only guidance should be the objective function 
and our discussion of the state of the economy.  So I look forward to walking that path. 
But with regard to today’s meeting, the message is a complicated and somewhat difficult 
one.  It’s a fairly narrow place in which to stand.  So let’s say we are raising rates, and we’re 
doing so because the data are strong and the outlook is strong, and we have some confidence in 
that.  At the same time, we acknowledge financial market turbulence, tightening in financial 
conditions, low global growth, and that kind of thing. 
Now, in the statement as written, you’ve got three changes that will provide lots and lots 
of opportunities to talk about uncertainty, data dependence, and there being no preset path.  
“Judges” invites discussion of that.  “Some” invites discussion of having done most of the work 
of normalization and there being relatively less further to go.  The “monitoring” clause now 
really gives you that opportunity.  So I feel like a lot of what I’m going to be doing in the press 
conference is going to be exactly what people are worried about or talking about, and filling up 
all three of those things is going to wind up sounding a lot of qualifications and, I think, frankly, 
more in a dovish direction. 
I don’t want to make last-minute changes that add to that.  I think that gives me all I need.  
I think that’s a lot.  That’s where the questions are going to be.  So all of the things you’re 
December 18–19, 2018
183 of 242


 
 
 
suggesting are sensible for one time or another, but I really am loath to make further changes, 
which ultimately do call into question why you’re raising in the first place.  If you have to add 
half a dozen qualifiers, why did you move in the first place? 
So I think it’s a pretty narrow place in which to stand.  I like the statement as written.  
And if anybody strongly feels differently, then please say so.  [No response]  If not, I’d like to go 
ahead with it as written.  Speaking of which, let me ask Jim Clouse to remind us of what we’re 
going to vote on and take the roll. 
MR. CLOUSE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The vote will be on the monetary policy 
statement as it appears on page 4 of Thomas’s briefing materials, and the vote will also 
encompass the directive to the Desk as it appears in the implementation note on pages 8 and 9 of 
Thomas’s briefing materials. 
Chairman Powell  
 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Williams 
 
Yes 
President Barkin 
 
 
Yes 
President Bostic 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Bowman  
 
Yes 
Governor Brainard  
 
Yes 
Governor Clarida  
 
Yes 
President Daly 
 
 
Yes 
President Mester 
 
 
Yes 
Governor Quarles  
 
Yes 
 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Now we’ve got two sets of related matters under the Board’s 
jurisdiction:  corresponding interest rates on reserves and discount rates.  As we’ve discussed, the 
proposal is to set the rates paid on required and excess reserves at a level 10 basis points below 
the upper end of the target range for the federal funds rate.  This should encourage trading in the 
federal funds market at rates well within the target range.  So may I have a motion from a Board 
member to take the proposed action with respect to the interest rates on reserves as set forth in 
December 18–19, 2018
184 of 242


 
 
 
the first paragraph associated with policy alternative B on the last page of Thomas’s briefing 
materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Now may I have a motion 
from a Board member to take the proposed actions with respect to the primary credit rate and the 
rates for secondary and seasonal credit as set forth in the second paragraph associated with 
policy alternative B on the last page of Thomas’s briefing materials? 
MR. CLARIDA.  So moved. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  May I have a second? 
MS. BRAINARD.  Second. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Without objection. 
Before we move to end our meeting and confirm the date of our next meeting, I want to 
take a moment to recognize David Wilcox’s last FOMC meeting.  As all of you know, David 
will be retiring early next year after a distinguished 30-year career at the Board. 
David actually started at the Board 38 years ago as a research assistant in what was then 
called the Econometrics and Computer Applications Section, which I’m told was the section that 
housed the predecessor of the Board’s FRB/US model.  After studying with our former Vice 
Chair Stan Fischer at MIT, David returned to the Board in 1986 as an economist in the Research 
and Statistics Division, where he was the Board’s expert on forecasting and analyzing consumer 
spending. 
December 18–19, 2018
185 of 242


 
 
 
He also spent some time in the Division of Monetary Affairs, in which he estimated 
money demand equations.  That experience apparently drove him to take steps to leave [laughter] 
to take positions in the Clinton administration, first at the Council of Economic Advisers and 
later as assistant secretary for economic policy at the Treasury Department. 
Thankfully for us, David Stockton lured David back to the Board in 2001 as deputy 
director of R&S.  And on David Stockton’s retirement in 2011, David was promoted to director.  
This is the 145th FOMC meeting that David has attended, including 60 as division director and 
FOMC economist. 
Here around the table, we know David best for his valuable insights on the U.S. economy 
and for his mostly accurate economic forecasts.  [Laughter]  He’s also made a point in his 
presentations of keeping the FOMC well informed about the disparities in economic outcomes 
across different segments of the U.S. population.  However, I also want to highlight two other 
important aspects of David’s leadership at the Board.  First, he has encouraged the staff to look 
for new ways to measure the economy using new and innovative methods and data sources that 
can provide more timely readings on economic activity than traditional metrics.  Second, David 
has been a leader—I’m tempted to say the leader—of our efforts to improve diversity at the 
Federal Reserve Board and in the economics profession more broadly. 
David, thank you for your dedication to your country and to your institution.  I know I 
speak for everyone on the Board and the FOMC in saying that we have the deepest respect and 
gratitude for your service.  We wish you the very best in the future, know that great things lie 
ahead for you, and look forward to seeing you wherever that next chapter takes you.  Thank you 
very much.  [Applause]  Let the transcript reflect extended applause.  [Laughter] 
December 18–19, 2018
186 of 242


 
 
 
MR. WILCOX.  Mr. Chair, thank you for your very generous comments.  I had a 
“Dickens” of a time figuring out what I was going to say.  [Laughter] 
I will say it’s been the privilege of a lifetime—and the fulfillment of a dream that was 
born when I was a sophomore in college—to work at this institution.  The dream was born when 
a macroeconomics teacher at Williams College walked in and told us how excited he was that we 
were going to be using a brand-new textbook authored by two writers whom I had never heard 
of, Stanley Fischer and Rudiger Dornbusch. 
I’m glad to step away from the job when it’s absolutely clear that all of the analytical 
issues confronting the staff have been pretty much wrapped up [laughter], and the pathway for all 
of you as policymakers is clearly illuminated, straight, and pretty much free of any risks.  So best 
of luck.  [Laughter]  Thank you for the privilege of serving all of you. 
CHAIRMAN POWELL.  Thanks very much.  Our final agenda item is to confirm that 
the next meeting will be on January 29 and 30, 2019.  And a buffet luncheon will be served 
today at 11:00 a.m.  Thanks, everybody, and I look forward to seeing you all again soon. 
END OF MEETING 
December 18–19, 2018
187 of 242
