INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE
Thursday 4th February 2016
Opening remarks by the Governor
Good afternoon.
At its meeting yesterday, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted 9-0 to
maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion.
When Bank Rate first reached this level almost seven years ago, the global economy
had stalled, financial markets had plummeted, the UK banking system was in crisis,
and its private domestic demand was collapsing.
Yesterday’s decision was taken amid sluggish global growth, turbulent financial
markets, but the ongoing resilience of the UK financial system and its private
domestic demand.
Those distinctions explain the difference between the outlook then for a recession and
now for a continued, solid expansion.
Global outlook
Global growth has slowed again over the past few months, as emerging economies
decelerated further and the US economy grew less than expected.  It is now expected
to remain around 1 percentage point below past averages this year, despite the boost
to real incomes in advanced economies from lower oil prices and the slight easing of
fiscal policy in the US and euro area.
Further ahead, growth in the UK’s main trading partners is expected to remain well
below past averages, reflecting the balance of steady growth in advanced economies
and an eventual slow, modest recovery in emerging markets.
For some time, the MPC has identified downside risks to global growth from
deteriorating prospects in emerging market economies.  These include:
-
the ongoing challenges of economic rebalancing in China;
-
the impact of sharply lower export prices for commodity producers; and
-
a reversal of capital flows and a marked tightening of financial conditions.
As these risks have begun to materialise, global financial conditions have deteriorated
notably, including widespread falls in advanced economy equities, rises in corporate
bond spreads, and notable increases in market volatility.
Domestic outlook
These developments pose downside risks to growth in the UK via trade, financial and
confidence channels.
The outlook for trade is particularly challenging, with net exports expected to drag on
UK growth over the forecast period.
However, there are three domestic offsets to the tightening of global financial
conditions.
-
First, sterling has fallen 3.5% since November, the largest decline between
Inflation Reports since the crisis.
-
Second, the gilt yield curve has fallen further, with UK ten-year rates down 25
basis points since November.
-
And third, the UK financial system is now resilient.
In this last regard, it is important to recall that major UK banks are well capitalised
taking into account the results of the Bank of England’s 2015 stress test, which
focussed on a much more severe shock to Chinese and emerging market growth,
sharply higher spikes in financial market volatility and steeper falls in risky asset
prices.  This means that banks are much less likely to amplify such stresses and are
likely to be much more able to continue lending to the real economy, even if global
conditions were to deteriorate further.
The resilience of the UK financial sector is matched by the resilience of UK private
domestic demand.  Despite the slight slowing in the pace of UK growth last year and
the prospects for a referendum this year on the UK’s membership of the EU,
indicators of household and business confidence currently remain robust.
After seven lean years, real incomes picked up sharply last year — supported by both
record-high employment and lower food and energy prices — and they are expected
to grow solidly going forward.
Business investment growth has been well above its pre-crisis average, with firms
investing to meet rising demand while benefiting from favourable credit conditions.
With the understandable exception of the oil and gas sector, such strong growth is
expected to continue; given high returns on capital and limited spare capacity.
Overall, given global weakness, somewhat more modest wage growth and
accelerating fiscal consolidation, the overall pace of growth in the UK is expected to
dip below past averages this year, before returning to around 2.5% thereafter, as a
tighter labour market and rising productivity support real incomes and consumption,
and spur business investment.
This more modest profile for demand compared with our last Report is matched by a
lower, but still solid, path for supply growth.
Developments on the supply side reflect an economy that’s moving from a period of
exceptionally rapid employment growth and unusually slow productivity growth to
one where growth in both reverts to more normal and sustainable rates.
With 1 0.5 million jobs created over the past three years, unemployment has fallen 3
percentage points to around 5%.  Job vacancies relative to unemployment are now
back at pre-crisis levels, and people are moving between jobs more frequently.
Given the resilience of the labour market, the MPC now expects the average hours
that people work to resume their pre-crisis downward trend, reflecting the higher job
security and a further normalisation of working patterns.
As labour supply growth has slowed, productivity growth has picked up, with last
year’s hourly productivity growth probably the fastest in four years.  The MPC
expects potential supply growth to rise steadily over the forecast as this pickup in
structural productivity growth largely offsets the reversion of labour supply growth to
normal rates.
What does this all mean for inflation?
Inflation outlook
As set out in my open letter to the Chancellor today, by far the most important reason
for low inflation remains the sharp falls in commodity prices globally.  Since our
November Report, oil is down by another third.
The scale of the most recent commodity price falls means that CPI inflation is likely
to remain low for much of this year.  However, with momentum from private demand
expected to eliminate the economy’s margin of spare capacity this year, domestic cost
growth should rise.  As the drag from external factors wanes, increasing domestic cost
pressures are expected to be more than sufficient to return inflation to the 2% target
by the start of 2018.
In the near term, the MPC judges the risks to inflation to lie to the downside. That
reflects the possibility that wage pressure takes a little longer to build following a
period of low headline inflation.  However, the mechanical return to higher rates of
inflation as past falls in energy prices drop from the annual comparison should in time
reduce this risk.  Moreover, the MPC judges that inflation expectations remain well
anchored, though it is watchful for signs that low inflation is having more persistent
second-round effects on wages.
Policy outlook
Returning inflation to target requires balancing the protracted drags from sterling’s
past appreciation and lower commodity prices with expected increases in domestic
cost growth.
Fully offsetting the drag on inflation from external factors over the short run would
involve too rapid an acceleration in domestic costs – one that would risk being
unsustainable and would generate undesirable volatility in output and employment.
Given these considerations, the MPC is setting policy to return inflation to the target
in around two years and keep it there in the absence of further shocks.
In the central case we set out today, one that is conditioned on a market path for Bank
Rate that was around 20 basis points higher on average than last night’s close, CPI
inflation is likely to exceed the 2% target slightly at the two-year point and then rise
further above it.
As a consequence, the MPC judges that it is more likely than not that Bank Rate will
need to rise over our forecast period.
As always, there are both upside and downside risks to inflation.  It could be higher if
the recent weakness in wage growth reflects temporary factors obscuring the
underlying tightness of the labour market. Equally, inflation could be lower if global
risks crystallise more abruptly or if weak external price pressures further contribute to
weaker wage growth.
In any event, the MPC stands ready to act to ensure inflation remains likely to return
to the target in a sustainable fashion.  We will do the right thing at the right time on
Bank Rate.
***
As one of the most open economies in the world, the UK cannot help but be affected
by an unforgiving global environment and sustained financial market turbulence.
However, our prospects for a continued solid expansion are underpinned by the
resilience built over the past seven years:
-
a  labour market with record-high employment;
-
strong private domestic demand reflecting improved private sector balance sheets,
rising productivity and robust confidence; and
-
a financial system capitalised for severe emerging market stress so that it can
continue to serve the real economy.
We look forward to your questions.
