Bank of England
Inflation Report Q&A
12th May 2016
Kamal Ahmed, BBC News:
Your gloomy forecast today comes after a whole host of poor
economic data for the UK on manufacturing, on construction.
Some people predict that the April growth figure could
already be as low as 0.1%.  You have said that if Britain
votes to leave the European Union, that could lead to
materially lower economic growth in the UK.  Given the
gloominess of your forecast and the data, can you rule out
Britain's economy being tipped into recession if we were to
leave the European Union?
Mark Carney:
Okay, let me distinguish.  We've published one forecast
today, which as per convention, is based on government
policy being followed.  We always do that, and we have done
it today.
And that forecast is affected in the short term by uncertainty
associated with the Referendum.  I think we all know that,
and we see it in a variety of indicators.  And we believe that
this uncertainty is influencing the slowdown, is one of the
influences for the slowdown in the first quarter and a more
marked slowdown, a more marked deceleration this quarter.
But conditioned on that assumption of remaining, those
uncertainty effects dissipate in subsequent months.  And the
actual forecast we have under Remain, I wouldn't describe as
gloomy.  There are these uncertainty effects; they dissipate
by the middle of next year - ultimate effects on the economy
dissipate by the middle of next year.  And we have growth
around trend over the course of the year following the
Referendum, and then picking up a bit, and actually puts the
economy in a bit of a position of excess demand, which is
why inflation is above target.
So yes, short-term effects, but in the fullness of time move
out of the way.
Now we have a responsibility when we have a major risk to
the forecast to talk about those risks to the forecast, if those
risks could manifest over the monetary policy horizon.  And
quite frankly, if it is an issue that the MPC has discussed, has
analysed, has looked at.
And as we've indicated - you see it in the Minutes, you see it
in the Monetary Policy Statement - the biggest risks to the
forecast concern the Referendum, not just about the fog of
uncertainty around the data in the near term, that level of
uncertainty, but the judgement that, if there were a vote to
leave, that would have material consequences for both
growth and inflation and therefore affect the stance of
monetary policy.
I would stress that that effect on the stance of monetary
policy is not automatic because there are potentially big
effects on each of the exchange rate, the supply of the
economy and aggregate demand.  And it's the sum of the
whole of those effects which the MPC would have to consider
in setting the stance of policy.
In that scenario, as we've said, we would expect material
slowing in growth, a notable rise in inflation, a challenging
trade-off.  And I think that is what I would take as the
important point here, which is that we're providing
information as best we can about our potential reaction
function in that scenario - the key drivers of where policy
would go in that most important risk scenario.
Dispute over number of questions
Kamal Ahmed, BBC News:
….. lower growth.  Does that mean negative and possible
recession?  That's all people want to know, isn't it?
Mark Carney:
I'll see if anyone else asks the question then.
Chris Giles, The Financial Times:
I think the question really is whether there'll be a recession,
so I'll ask that question straight up.  I mean, you've given
quite a detailed forecast of the remain side.  The public want
to know from a reasonably independent source, or a very
independent and credible source, which the Bank of England
is, what is likely to happen if they make choices.
You've given quite an indication in the Report what you think
is likely to happen in words, but not in numbers.  You've said
unemployment is likely to rise, given our productivity.  That
suggests a recession.  Will you use the R word?
Mark Carney:
All right.  Recap, focusing specifically on Remain because,
Kamal, I did want to make clear about the central forecast
that we have, which is conditioned on remaining and Chris
has focused just on the Leave risk scenarios.  So I'll answer
that.
Material slowdown in growth, notable increase in inflation.
That's the MPC's judgement.  It's a judgement not based on a
whim, it's a judgement based on rigorous analysis and careful
consideration.  And it is the judgement of the independent
MPC and it's the judgement of all members of the MPC; I'll
make that very clear.
Now of course there's a range of possible scenarios around
those directions, which could possibly include a technical
recession - could possibly include that.  We haven't done a
formal forecast. The thing that I would stress - again, what's
important here from our perspective is to provide
information, provide perspective - not just about the major
risks to our central forecast, but what it might mean for
monetary policy and what are the considerations for the
stance of monetary policy.  Because what we don't want to
do, wouldn't want to do, which wouldn't be fair to the British
people, would be to pop up at the start of July and say - oh,
by the way, this is what we thought then about the situation
now.  So this is our best perspective.
I would stress, though, that our perspectives, both in terms
of the central forecast, conditioned on Remain, and our
perspectives around risk, extend out to the monetary policy
horizon.  It's entirely within our remit.  Our remit is two to
three years.  We're not making a judgement, we're not
making a forecast - I know you know this, but it's important
to stress it.  We're not making a judgement or a forecast or
an assessment of the longer term economic consequences of
either decision, nor will we make that determination.  But we
have a responsibility under our remit, it is explicitly in statute
and in our remit to talk about the risks and the trade-offs that
monetary policy faces so that the British people can better
understand the potential paths of monetary policy.  Because
the one thing we all know is that the path of the economy,
the shocks in an economy are uncertain, and it's better if
people can anticipate how the Bank, specifically the MPC,
would respond if those uncertainties come to pass.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
You talk about the potential path of monetary policy in
response to what could be a technical recession.  The
Monetary Policy Committee did discuss Brexit.  At that
discussion, what was the range of policy responses that were
considered?  Was there a rate cut considered?  And what
would it mean for gradual and limited in terms of rate rises if
you judged inflation to be a concern?
Mark Carney:
No, I understand the question.  Just to be clear, we discussed
the economics of that risk scenario to have a richer
appreciation of that.  So we had a rigorous discussion around
that, fulsome discussion around that - supported by analysis.
We didn't develop a full projection though, to be absolutely
clear.  But we had that discussion.
We didn't then translate that into the stance of monetary
policy, because the only decision we were making is about
the circumstances here and now.  What's the appropriate
stance of monetary policy as we are today, given our central
forecast?  And it was clear to all members of the Committee,
as you saw with the announcement today - a 9 to 0 vote -
that the most appropriate stance was to maintain policy as it
is: Bank Rate at half a percent and purchased assets at £375
billion.
Faisal Islam, Sky News:
Governor, you've gone further that you went into Scottish
Referendum, you've gone further than you have so far on the
EU Referendum.  Is there not a risk that this institution,
centuries old, that people look up to for independent views on
the economy, may be being embroiled in deeply controversial
politics?
Mark Carney:
I would flip it 180°.  This is the biggest risk in the judgement
of the independent Financial Policy Committee - ten
members; it's the biggest risk in the judgement of the
independent Monetary Policy Committee - nine members - to
the achievement of their remits.
It is our responsibility to analyse those risks, to consider how
and if we should mitigate those risks, and then under the
standards of transparency in this country, which are
appropriately extremely high and are consistent with the
enormous responsibilities this Institution has, we have to
communicate those.
The political choice is to suppress this type of analysis, these
types of discussions, so people can understand.  But this is
entirely within remit.  So let's take a different circumstance.
You referenced Scotland.
The issues around Scotland were issues that principally
affected financial stability in the short term.  Issues around
stability of certain financial institutions headquartered in
Scotland.  They were not issues that - and these were serious
issues we took seriously, we had contingency plans, we
revealed them after the fact.  But they were not issues that,
at the time, in the judgement of the MPC - and we were on
the MPC at the time - that rose to the level of being the
biggest risk to the economic outlook for the UK and for the
potential stance of monetary policy.
It's a different situation, and in terms of why are we talking
about this today?  We're talking about it today because we
have a responsibility to produce an inflation forecast, and
when we produce that it's not just a point projection, but it
gives a sense of the major risks.  And what comes with that is
responsibilities for transparency - nothing more.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:
You mentioned in the Report and in your letter to the
Chancellor that sterling could fall, perhaps sharply, in the
event of a Brexit vote.  What do you mean by sharply?  It's
already fallen by 9%; do you mean more than 9%?  20%?
Not very specific.  And just adding on from that, do you think
that fall would be permanent or do you think sterling would
bounce back?
Mark Carney:
Okay, let me start and then ask Ben to amplify.
It's relatively unusual that we would talk about the currency
and the direction of the currency.  It's happened in the past, I
think in the aftermath of the crisis - understandably because
there was a major supply shock that had happened to the
economy at the time, and it made sense to give the context.
The circumstances at present are that movements in the
currency appear - some of the movements, a proportion of
the movements in the currency have an identifiable cause,
and we were able to do some work in order to estimate that.
And then in addition, the stance in markets both in the fact of
the way the currency moved with specific events; the tenor of
options markets, the skews in options markets and the
potential shift in fundamentals all point in one direction for
the currency.  Now it's a question of dimension, which I
wouldn't want to give.  But Ben, you might want -
Ben Broadbent:
Yes.  As the Governor says, we haven't made any numerical
forecasts in the event of a leave vote at all.  That would
include the currency.  What is true is that the behaviour of
the foreign exchange market over the last six months
suggests that the probability of leaving has had a dampening
effect on the exchange rate. And there are a range of things
that might affect it in that event, some of them more
enduring than others.  I think the Governor referred to the
main categories in his opening statement.  If there were any
enduring effect on productivity, particularly in tradeable, that
would have an enduring effect on the real exchange rate.
Similarly, if there were restrictions on the degree of openness
or a less open economy, perhaps including even changes in
tariffs, that would have a permanent effect - or at least a
more enduring one.  And in the short run, if risk premia on
sterling assets were to rise, you might expect the exchange
rate to overshoot slightly; that effect would dissipate over
time.
So there are a range of potential factors.  You know, we've
not put numbers on anything.  It would be particularly in the
case of the exchange rate to say anything precise about the
numbers at all.  And if you look at the average move in
sterling between Inflation Reports, it might be of the order of
3 percentage points one direction or the other.  I imagine
we'd be talking about larger numbers than that, but we're not
going to put numbers.
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News: You've talked today about these challenging trade-offs that
the MPC would face between stabilising prices and the hit to
output and employment.  Could you elaborate on the
potential policy tools that the Bank of England has that they
could respond with, and how the MPC sees their associated
trade-offs?  Might the MPC favour responding initially with
liquidity and credit easing measures rather than a loosening
of monetary policy to avoid exacerbating this drop in the
pound?
Mark Carney:
Well, the first thing I'd say is - it depends which way the
trade-off falls, because both your examples went in one
direction.  And that's the point.  It's not an automatic
response.  The direction will depend on the balance of these
forces.  That's the big message I would take from this at this
stage.
The second point, which follows from the first, is that in either
direction we're in conventional monetary policy space.
Obviously if we needed to tighten policy - a conventional
instrument.  If we needed to loosen policy, it's the judgement
of the MPC that we have room to further lower Bank Rate
before we would have to use more unconventional measures.
And then the last thing I'd just re-emphasise is that we have
a range of options on the so-called unconventional side, from
quantitative easing to credit easing, that would be available.
If people are interested - and I'm going to end my answer
here - but if people are interested on the liquidity and other
side, I think it would be useful to have Minouche to talk about
some of those issues if there's an interest.
Ben Chu, The Independent:
Governor, the Chancellor's put out a statement this morning
saying that the Bank's views on this suggest that Brexit would
create a lose-lose situation for Britain.  Either way we'd be
poorer.  Now there's not many wavering voters who would
listen to that and think Brexit was a good idea, so the
question is - has he accurately characterised the Bank's view
on this or is he putting undue words in your mouth?
Mark Carney:
Well, the Chancellor's responsible for his words.  Our analysis
only relates to the stance of monetary policy. Ultimately our
remit is to deliver low, stable, predictable inflation, and to do
so in a fashion that avoids undue volatility in employment and
in output.
So judgements about the longer term economic implications -
or other issues, other issues related to this vote - are for
others to make.  We're only focused on an important issue -
monetary stability - as the MPC, but an issue that's relevant
over the course of the next two to three years.
Jason Douglas, Wall Street
Journal:
Can I ask you please about another risk you mentioned in the
Inflation Report?  In the account of the discussions between
the MPC and the FPC, you describe how a vote in favour of
Brexit could lead to major financing difficulties.  I assume
you're referring here to the current account deficit.  What's
the MPC's assessment of the risk of a sudden stop that a lot
of people seem to be worried about, and how would policy
respond to those sort of issues, please?  Thank you.
Mark Carney:
Well, so now speaking from the perspective of the FPC,
because you've asked it.  The reason why the FPC judges that
risks around the Referendum are the biggest domestic risk is
because of the potential to amplify pre-existing risks, one of
which is what you're asking about - the current account.  And
the issue is, broad brush, is that the current account, as you
know, is very large by historical and international standards.
Now if we're going to have a very large current account
deficit, this is the one type you want to have.  Our liabilities
are in sterling and it's not accompanied by rapid private
sector borrowing.  But it is financed - a substantial proportion
of the financing is through foreign direct investment, and it
would appear that one of the considerations behind that
foreign direct investment, for some of it at least, is the UK's
status vis-à-vis the rest of Europe.
So replacing, at least for a period of time, that FDI is likely -
all things being equal - likely to result, if not a sudden stop - I
wouldn't necessarily go there - but in higher risk premia on a
range of sterling assets, higher financing costs.  The
consequence of that is less of it will come in; people will make
decisions around that.
But in terms of market functioning - because you referenced
market functioning, I just wonder - Minouche, can I ask you
to say a word on - this is not news, but I think it's important
to understand that what we're doing as the Bank as a whole
is to use everything we can to mitigate any of these factors in
and around the Referendum, regardless of outcome.  Our job
is to try and mitigate.  And maybe just say a word if you
could.
Minouche Shafik:
Sure.  I mean, on the sterling side, as you probably know,
we've already announced that we'll be doing three additional
auctions in June - two before the Referendum and one after,
to make sure that sterling liquidity is available.  And we also
have a very well developed framework in the sterling
monetary framework to provide liquidity to firms that need it.
On the foreign currency side, clearly the first line of defence
is firms' own management of their resources.  And in the
course of normal supervision, the Prudential Regulation
Authority has made sure that firms are well prepared and
have plans in place around the Referendum.
In addition to that, many UK banks - the larger ones - have
access to foreign currency through other central banks,
through the ECB, through the Fed, through the Swiss National
Bank.  And we ourselves of course have the swap lines with
the G7 as well as the Swiss Central Bank to provide foreign
currency should we need it.
Geoff Cutmore, CNBC:
Governor, you focused a lot in this Report about the potential
domestic impact of a Brexit vote.  Could I ask you for the
international context, because in the Report you talk about
some improvement in the international context.  China, no
hard landing perhaps; the commodity markets starting to
turn a little higher; America doing okay.
But in this debate we have seen President Obama arrive and
threaten to push the UK to the back of the queue over a trade
deal and we've heard noises from Brussels that perhaps there
would be financial consequences, i.e. a levy placed on the UK
should it exit, in the same way that some other states have
partnership arrangements for trade, which they pay for.
Can I ask - did you discuss what perhaps some of the
implications of those threats might be on the economy as a
result of the external international pressures rather than the
domestic ones?  And if you did have those conversations,
what kind of conclusions were drawn?
Mark Carney:
I think the first thing to say, just overall context, is that if we
had detailed discussions about such issues, we would talk - it
would show up in the Minutes.  And that's the first thing.  The
second is to re-emphasise that our forecast, which as you
know is conditioned on Remain - government policy, standard
convention of the Bank always followed - but our forecast has
a three-year horizon.  And these types of issues start to
become relevant upon exit.
Now the question is how much anticipation of these changes -
however they pan out, whatever negotiation is done - how
much anticipation of those changes and uncertainty around
that starts to affect the path not just of demand but actually
of supply in the economy?  Think less investment affecting
productivity as a consequence of that.  And that's part of
what plays into this risk scenario and the difficult trade-offs.
On the international dimension, what I would say - I would
say two points.  I've talked less about the structural aspect of
the international dimension, but just observe that - as we do
in the Report and the Minutes - there is a possibility of a
negative spill-over to global financial conditions because of
uncertainty generated in this country.  That is a possibility.
That shouldn't be a surprise to anybody in this room.
This issue is the number one issue that is raised with me and
my colleagues every single time we meet a fellow central
bank governor, foreign finance minister, head of major
corporation internationally, head of a bank, head of an asset
manager and I would say most domestic small and medium
size enterprises that we meet.  So it is an area of focus and it
is a reasonable assumption that the uncertainty around this
can have spill-overs internationally for a period of time.
Now we would expect that, in the event of - as in our core
forecast - this doesn't have an impact because uncertainty
dissipates and the result is the result.  And our forecast is -
for the global economy - the components have changed a bit;
you alluded to some of it in your question - but it's pretty
much the same forecast as we had in February, and I would
characterise it, I think fairly, as downside risks internationally
in the short term have gone down, but they are unchanged
over the forecast horizon; there are still downside risks to
that global forecast.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:
Governor, I think at the end of your opening statement you
said that monetary policy would not be able to immediately
offset the impact of a shock following Brexit.  Should the
economy head towards recession, in the event of a vote to
leave, are you saying that the Bank would effectively be
powerless to prevent it from happening?
Mark Carney:
Well, look, that's a general statement and there are certain
shocks.  Monetary policy operates with a lag - long and
variable lag, as you know - and if there is a sharp adjustment
in demand, in activity, from whatever event, it will take some
time for stimulus, if it's provided - if it's appropriate to be
provided - for it to course through the economy and offset, to
cushion that fall in demand.
At this stage I'd loop back to the judgement at this stage of
the Committee in discussing the risk scenario is that those
multiple effects, potential effects on demand, supply and the
exchange rate, and from our sole focus, our primary focus, I
should say, of bringing inflation back sustainably to target
over a two to three-year horizon, over the monetary policy
horizon, the direction of monetary policy is not automatic.
Helia Ebrahimi, Channel 4 News:
You said earlier that your Report is based on rigorous analysis
and careful consideration, but a lot of Brexit campaigners
would just say this is more Project Fear, not just because the
Chancellor was able to conclude the Bank would be forced
into a lose-lose policy decision making situation, but also
because there's very little detail about any potential upside to
the boost in trade caused by the pound, any slacking off of
regulation, etc.  What has the Bank done to ensure that you
don't get caught out politically by people who think you might
be just on the side of the Chancellor?
Mark Carney:
Well look, first off, Helia, I mean the Chancellor answers for
himself in his words so I'm not - I haven’t even seen the
comments that you’re referencing.
We’re fully aware of the return to exports and the impact on
net exports of a persistent move in the exchange rate.  but
also I think we might be a little - have a little better
appreciation of the potential inflationary consequences of an
exchange rate move if - particularly if that exchange rate
move is associated with a supply shock, a negative supply
shock.
And I’d refer back to, is it the February Report, where we
detailed, we went through this and again we summarised
extensive analysis in reports.  But we’ve done a lot of work as
a Committee and as an institution on exchange rate pass
through that has learnt from the experience of the post crisis
period.
The fact is that - look, in eight years you’re going to get all
this under the new Bank of England which is all the
transcripts of the discussions and all the relevant analysis is
going to come out.  And I'm hoping to still be alive in eight
years so you can come and say did you just say - but these
are risks.
This the independent MPC looking dispassionately at issues in
fulfilment of its remit.  And I think what’s important about
this is that this is a possibility, and that in the event that it’s
the decision of the British people to leave, that there is an
understanding of what the economic issues that face the Bank
of England and its stance on monetary policy and what it
might be.  And it is far better to outline those in advance than
as I say to pop up and to address them in real time.
And apart from anything else, we have a responsibility if we
have done analysis, if it has been top of mind, if it has been a
preoccupation of the MPC, if it is in its judgement - which it is
- the biggest risk to the forecast, to talk about it.  And that’s
what we’ve done.
David Smith, Sunday Times:
Governor you've said that the monetary policy response to a
leave vote could go either way.  It’s possible that interest
rates in the economy would go up even if monetary policy
was relaxed, because of a rise in bank funding costs.  Do you
think the kind of thing you've talked about today on liquidity
and so on, you could prevent that from happening or is that
something that would just be part of the new era and so
interest rates as experienced by ordinary people and
businesses would actually be higher in either event?
Mark Carney:
Well you’re absolutely right; it’s possible that bank funding
costs and a broader range of corporate borrowing spreads,
whether in capital markets or through banks, could increase
for a period of time because of uncertainty not least, but also
because of financial flows.
The judgement we would take into account as the MPC would
be how long is that likely to persist and as you know how
does that blend with the overall stance of demand, prospects
for supply, exchange rate, etc. and do we need to adjust
overall financial conditions by changing bank rate?
Your question on liquidity though is apt because one of the
things we can do and would do, and as Minouche has talked
about a bit earlier, is ensure that the one thing that doesn’t
happen is that there is a temporary dislocation in markets, so
there's a shortage of liquidity for banks that have lots of
collateral but there's just - there's timing issues or other
factors that mean that bank funding costs go up
unnecessarily.
And so the types of facilities that Minouche has - we
preannounced and Minouche has highlighted - I mean these
can flex up very rapidly.  It’s standard collateral that’s
prepositioned with the Bank of England already, it’s readily
accessible.  In our view actually, when we at some point in
the distant future we get out of this extraordinary time where
rates are as low as they’ve ever been and liquidity is
otherwise fairly ample in the system, our view is that these
types of facilities will become - their use of them will become
much more frequent because there will be temporary
dislocations in markets because we’ve pushed liquidity risk
into markets.
And so the short answer now to your question on the liquidity
side is that that’s one of the things that we’re looking to
mitigate in either scenario if there's any stress, so that these
costs aren’t unnecessarily passed onto households and
businesses, yes.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk:
Good afternoon Governor.  As you've stated, as the
statements said, forecasting visibility is poor at the moment
due to the ongoing uncertainty around the Brexit vote.  How
soon after the vote either way would the MPC judge to be
appropriate to then resume normal viewing of the economy?
Mark Carney:
Normal business, yeah.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk:
Yeah, you know and when would things start to crystallise,
and we look at this rate rise - the path which you've stated
that we’re still on, how soon after the actual vote would you
deem appropriate?
Mark Carney:
Okay well let me - I’ll try and give you the headline and I'm
going to ask Ben to expand, which is that we have done - our
forecast incorporates some significant uncertainty effects.
And then we have to make a judgement about how quickly
those effects tail off.
And there's a lot of experience with these type of
circumstances, there's I think the case history and some of
the econometrics goes 30 different examples globally, and so
there's a normal time decay to that uncertainty coming off.
There's reason to think that that uncertainty would come off
more rapidly in this circumstance, but then there's a question
of how rapidly and what the effects are.
Ben Broadbent:
Yeah and I won’t add much.  There's a box that describes
some work we’ve done on this, page 14 I think, and there
were two distinct points to make about timing.  One, as the
Governor just said, is that relative to the sort of average
duration of these uncertainty shocks, the Committee has
made a judgement that that will come away slightly faster
than normal because we can see an exact date, conditional
on Remain, when that will go away.  On the other hand, the
effect of a given shock seems to be quite protracted on the
economy, so it fades away but actually the forecast is
affected to a diminishing extent, but still affected by this
shock even in the event of a remain vote actually into next
year.
Now of course there is always uncertainty, a Committee
always has to face sort of signal plus noise and faces the job
of trying to extract one from the other, but there is that little
bit more and the effects on the economy will weigh a little bit
longer.  So probably the answer to your question is - not
absolutely straight away, a little bit beyond that.
Szu Chan, The Telegraph:
A question on Brexit incomes and unemployment.  You talk
about the obvious connection between Brexit eroding people’s
real incomes.  Could you talk a little bit about other forces
that might affect that?  Some economists say that in the long
run because the UK economy at least now it has a very
flexible labour market, the adjustment will be less in
unemployment and more in people’s wages being reduced.
And just a clarification.  You talk about materially lower
growth, a notably higher path of inflation and perhaps rising
unemployment.  Is the word stagflation too strong?
Mark Carney:
You know, in terms of long run, one of the great strengths of
this economy is the flexibility of the labour market and the
flexibility of the economy as a whole.  And it has had many
shocks in the past and will in the future and adjusts well to
them.  We don’t have, as you know, and are not going to
make, a longer term assessment of a stay or leave - a
comparison of stay or leave scenarios, so in that regard I
can’t give you more than an impressionistic answer to that
question and so I’ll skip it.
In terms of materially lower or higher, I’d refer to back to my
answer to Chris Giles, if I may, which is that broad brush
that’s the direction we see.  There are scenarios around that
and the flexibility of the economy will help, the ability to -
what’s the best contribution of the Bank, the MPC specifically,
in those circumstances, regardless of which scenario?  It’s to
be clear about the trade-off, about the horizon over which
we’re going to bring inflation back to target from likely above,
quite possibly above, and to only do just as much as is
necessary in order to do that - no more.
And that’s why it’s important not to pre-wire policy, if you
will, in those circumstances because we don’t know the
absolute magnitude of what these shocks would be in that
scenario, and we would have to see them and see the
persistence in order to judge the right range of policy.  We do
have a judgement and it’s the judgement of the independent
MPC, all nine members of the MPC, that growth would be
materially lower, inflation would be notably higher, and that is
a considered judgement.
Mario Blascak,
World Business Press Online:
Governor, some of the commercial surveys indicated that
there is a certain extent of cost side pressure or at producer
prices, so what if producers raise prices?  To what extent do
you reflect that in the black box of forecasting inflation short
term?
Mark Carney:
You’re in charge of the black box, aren’t you?
Ben Broadbent:
Oh right, yes of course.  I’ll give you the standard answer
which is one of many, many things that affect the forecast.
To the extent it affects it at all, those little pricing surveys,
it’s really much more in the short run I think that they can be
informative about that.  Further out, which is probably more
relevant for monetary policy, looking at inflation 18 months,
two, three years ahead, I don’t think they’re of great
relevance and there we rely on our economic model.  But
certainly it can matter for the near term picture.
Sam Nussey, Nikkei:
In terms of the concrete measures the Bank will be taking to
support the economy around the referendum, I mean you've
touched on the extra auctions and so on, can we expect to
see any more concrete information ahead of the Referendum
or is this essentially it in terms of what we will be hearing?
And is it a concern that - obviously the number of MPC
meetings is actually going down from later on this year -
given the rising risks to the British economy, is this a concern
that the MPC will actually miss meeting less regularly?  Thank
you.
Mark Carney:
Thank you.  In terms of measures, look I mean never say
never, but one of the lessons we learnt from the Scottish
experience was that it was better to announce potential
liquidity facilities earlier to avoid sending a signal.  So when
we - you get a few weeks in advance of a known event and
you announce a liquidity facility.  However harmless and
prudent and careful that is, some people will interpret it as a
signal of potential stress.  So by announcing it months in
advance, these series of auctions that Minouche talked about,
we think we’ve avoided that and I think we have.
We have the mechanisms in place and we have the benefit of
- so broadly my answer is yes, I wouldn’t anticipate anything
else.  We have the benefit of having within the broader Bank
of England the supervisory arm, the PRA, and the supervisors
are doing their job which is to go out and ask firms about
their contingency plans.  So we’re not directing them what to
do, but we’re asking them what they are doing.  And then the
PRA board and the FPC are informed about those, what banks
specifically are doing to mitigate any risk that they potentially
see.  And then that’s the system working as it should.  And
you know the MPC is informed about that as needs be.
Dan Hinge, Central Banking:
You mentioned that some of the indicators are getting harder
to interpret.  Are you having to apply more judgements to
your models?  What’s the kind of relationship between what
your models are telling you and how you’re adjusting those
within your own conditioning assumptions?  And is that
increasing kind of the risk that you might be wrong about the
forecast?
Mark Carney:
Well I think the first thing is to say that we have to make a
judgement, as I think Ben referred to and it’s certainly
described in the Report, we have to make a judgement that
there's this big increase in uncertainty, looming uncertainty in
these various measures.  Some of that arguably is beginning
to show up or has already showed up in some of the CIPs, the
PMIs or some of the confidence indicators, some other hard
economic data.  So we have to make a judgement about
whether - how not to double count that.
So yes, that means that for a period we are adjusting the
relationship between - I mean we still check the pure
relationship if you will, the historic relationship - between a
given survey or other indicator, and what it could be telling us
about investment or consumption or growth as a whole.  But
we’re overlaying this, the uncertainty factors, and making
judgements around it.
It just means that in real time yes things are a little less
informative and there's two-way - I think the important thing,
there's two-way risk around that.  We could be
overestimating the effects of uncertainty and the underlying
economy therefore could be slowing of its own accord more
than we think, or we could be overplaying it a bit and the
opposite is going to happen.  And so the question goes back
to Harry’s question I think which is that when we get out from
the other side of June 23rd and into subsequent meetings,
then we make a decision.
I'm sorry I didn’t answer one of the questions there which
was about frequency of meetings.  And just to be clear on
that we will be meeting every six weeks as opposed to every
four weeks so let’s be realistic in terms of the gaps in time.
And then secondly, we can meet any time.  We can meet
tomorrow if we wanted to and make a decision.  We can meet
this afternoon actually if we wanted to, we could meet right
now, we come in here and you guys could watch.  And at
some point that’s where central bank transparency will end
up, and then after a few of those meetings no one will show
up again to watch this stuff.
Jamie Robertson, BBC:
You mention about trading relationships and about in a post-
Brexit world that trading relationships with other countries
will take some time to renegotiate.  Can you expand on that
at all?  And how serious a risk or how much of a problem
would that prove to be if it was a prolonged period of time?
Mark Carney:
Well, two things.  I think it’s commonly acknowledged that it’s
an uncertain period of time to renegotiate these agreements.
And there is some uncertainty about - if it were a vote to
leave - what the relationship particularly with the European
Union would be, both for trade and investment.
And for the monetary policy horizon what’s relevant are two
things.  For most of it for the next two years, assuming a
negotiation begins.  Assumption: assuming a negotiation
begins quickly.  For the next two years what’s relevant is the
uncertainty around what the actual agreements are, and do
businesses invest and do people spend on the basis of certain
assumptions or do they wait?  Experience, common sense
tells you that people wait a bit.  But econometrically you can
see that people wait and businesses wait to a degree in
anticipation of clarity, and that’s one of the reasons why
growth would be expected to slow.
Once the arrangements are in place, yes it matters.  It
matters for - at least for a period of time because it means
that the economy has to adjust to those new relationships
unless they’re exactly the same as they were before.  There
will be some capital that is stranded; there will be some jobs
and capital that needs to be reallocated to different sectors.
It will have some impact for some period of time on the
productive potential of the economy.  But that’s - for the
purposes that we care about as the Monetary Policy
Committee, you only see the first bits of that in year three if
you will of our forecast, and then our forecast stops.
So we don’t make a judgement and we’re not going to make
a judgment or a forecast of that longer term scenario, the
equilibrium if you will once everything is in place in a post-
Brexit world.  That’s for others; many others are doing
analyses of that and they can debate it out.
The reason we make a forecast, just to be absolutely clear, is
we need one in order to conduct monetary policy.  We reveal
it in order to explain it.  And we talk and reveal about the
major risk in order for people to understand that you know a
forecast isn’t a guarantee and how we would react if certain
major events were to transpire.
Jenny Scott:
We’re almost out of time.  Is there anyone who hasn’t had a
question yet who would like to ask one?
Question:
I just want to clarify one thing.  You told me that the biggest
risk for both the MPC and FPC was now Brexit, but at the
Treasury Select Committee you said it was the biggest
domestic risk, that’s just a point of clarity.
And in general at the TSC you warned about the impact
specifically of leaving the single market.  That is now the
established policy position of the head of Vote Leave, has that
raised further concerns for you about risks particularly to the
financial sector?
Mark Carney:
Judgement at the FPC, I thought I said domestic risk for FPC.
Biggest risk to the forecast for the MPC, why we’re here
today, risk concerning the Referendum which include a sort of
fog of uncertainty around current data and forecasting under
a Remain, and the issues that we’ve been discussing in some
of these questions.  From the FPC’s perspective, judgement of
its most recent meeting and Report is that the biggest
domestic risk put risks around China over the medium term
as higher.
In terms of the implications of a WTO type relationship if you
will for the financial sector, yeah from a financial stability
perspective, it’s not clear to me that that changes the
severity of the risk to financial stability, it would arguably and
quite realistically have implications for the level of activity in
financial services in this country, but that is a different issue.
And I’ll leave it at that.
Jenny Scott:
Okay, we’re out of time.  Thank you very much, everyone.
