Inflation Report Press Conference
Thursday 12th May 2016
Opening remarks by the Governor
Good afternoon.
Perspective
After the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, the United Kingdom’s
expansion finally took hold about three years ago.
It was driven initially by sharp declines in economic uncertainty and significant
improvements in credit conditions.  These helped restore confidence and unleash
pent-up household demand.
The nascent recovery was reinforced by a more resilient banking system and
accommodative monetary policy, with the MPC’s forward guidance reassuring
households and businesses that Bank Rate wasn’t going to rise at the first signs of
growth, thereby creating the confidence to spend, hire and invest.
The recovery was supported by a large, positive supply shock – particularly a notable
increase in the labour force participation rate.
At over 3% annualised, the UK was the fastest growing economy in the G7 despite
ongoing fiscal consolidation and persistent global weakness, with the growth of our
trading partners running at only two-thirds of their pre-crisis average.
With time, the boost from lower uncertainty faded, pent-up demand was largely spent,
and consumption growth became increasingly supported by greater hours worked, a
sharp pickup in real wages (largely due to commodity price falls), and lower saving
rates. Business investment rose with demand and continued improvement in financial
conditions. Trade and fiscal policy continued to drag.
By early last year, growth had begun to slow to around 2.5%, as the labour supply
shock had largely run its course, and supply growth became more reliant on modest
and somewhat erratic growth in productivity.
By the second half of last year, though still near the top of the G7, growth had
moderated to around 2%, which is about the rate of potential supply growth.
Outlook
In the first quarter of this year, growth slowed further to around 1.5% annualised and
now appears to be decelerating again.  This most recent weakness reflects in part the
forthcoming referendum on the UK’s membership of the European Union, which has
pushed up uncertainty measures to levels not seen since the euro-area crisis.
The referendum makes describing the outlook for inflation more challenging than
usual.  That’s because some asset prices used to condition the Committee’s
projections are likely to have been affected by market participants’ perceptions of its
consequences.
The MPC estimates that referendum effects could account for around half of the 9%
fall in the sterling exchange rate since its November 2015 peak, and we have decided
not to let that part of the exchange rate’s fall feed through to our growth or inflation
projections.
This judgement is consistent with the MPC’s long-established convention to assume
that government policy is followed. Specifically we have conditioned our projection
on an assumed continuation of EU membership, and as a consequence the forecast
also assumes that the current elevated levels of uncertainty unwind in the months that
follow the referendum.
In the Committee’s central case, the outlook for inflation is in most respects similar to
the one we described three months ago.  The MPC continues to expect CPI inflation
to pick up over the next year as the impact of past falls in commodity prices fades and
as the effects of the earlier appreciation of sterling wane.  The recovery in inflation is
likely to be further supported by the recent sharp increase in oil prices and some
additional stimulus from lower market interest rates.
Moreover, if demand evolves as expected, the remaining spare capacity in the
economy will likely be used up during 2016, in turn raising domestic costs.  The
Committee judges it likely that these factors will be sufficient to return inflation back
to 2% by mid-2018 and push it a little above the target thereafter, reflecting modest
excess demand.
The central projections set out in the Inflation Report today are conditioned on a
gentle rise in interest rates over the forecast period.  Under that central case, the MPC
judges it more likely than not that Bank Rate will need to be higher at the end of that
period than at present in order to return inflation to target in a sustainable manner. Our
now-familiar forward guidance on limited and gradual rate increases and conditions
for asset sales continues to hold.
Risks to the outlook
Now turning to the elephant in the room.
The MPC judges that the most significant risks to its forecast concern the referendum.
With macroeconomic and financial indicators likely to be less informative than usual
in light of the referendum, the Committee is currently reacting more cautiously to data
releases than would normally be the case.  There is a risk that we could be over- or
under-estimating underlying momentum in the economy in the event of a vote to
remain in the EU.
More profoundly, a vote to leave the EU could have material economic effects – on
the exchange rate, on demand and on the economy’s supply potential – that could
affect the appropriate setting of monetary policy.
The recent behaviour of the foreign exchange market suggests that, were the UK to
vote to leave the EU, sterling’s exchange rate would fall further, perhaps sharply.
This would likely be consistent with changes to some of the real fundamentals that
drive sterling including the terms of trade, productivity, and risk premia. In isolation,
a further fall in sterling would boost inflation over the policy horizon.
Aggregate demand would also likely fall, relative to our forecast, in the face of tighter
financial conditions, lower asset prices, and greater uncertainty about the UK’s
trading relationships. Households could defer consumption, and firms could delay
investment.  Global financial conditions could also tighten, generating potential
negative spillovers to foreign activity that, in turn, could dampen demand for UK
exports.  All else equal, lower aggregate demand would tend to reduce inflation over
the policy horizon.
However, over time, there may also be negative effects on aggregate supply,
including slower capital accumulation and the need to reallocate resources across the
economy in response to changing trading and investment patterns. On their own, such
supply effects would tend to boost inflation over the policy horizon.
The combination of these influences on demand, supply and the exchange rate could
lead to a materially lower path for growth and a notably higher path for inflation than
in the central projections set out in the May Inflation Report.
In such circumstances, the MPC would face a challenging trade-off between
stabilising inflation on the one hand, and stabilising output and employment on the
other.  The implications for monetary policy would not be automatic; its direction
would depend on the relative magnitudes of the demand, supply and exchange-rate
effects.
Whatever outlook materialises, the MPC will determine the course for monetary
policy that delivers the inflation target in a sustainable and timely manner, which
generally means returning inflation to target within two to three years and keeping it
there.
Conclusion
The people of the United Kingdom will make a significant decision on the 23rd of
June.  They will do so after considering a much broader range of issues than monetary
and financial stability.
Consistent with its remit, the MPC will address the consequences of that decision for
growth and inflation over the monetary policy horizon.
There are limits, however, to what monetary policy can deliver.  When shocks drive
demand below supply, monetary policy can soften the blow.  When shocks drive
supply below demand, monetary policy can make the unsustainable sustainable.  Over
the medium run, it can deliver a level of demand consistent with the path for supply in
order to meet the inflation target.
But monetary policy cannot immediately offset all the effects of a shock.
Neither is the path of supply nor the path of medium-term economic growth and its
implications for jobs, wages, and wealth the gift of monetary policymakers.  These
will be driven by much bigger decisions.
Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the Bank of England’s best contribution to
promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom will be to use all our tools to
support financial stability and to chart the right path for inflation back to target.
