Bank of England
Inflation Report Q&A
4th February 2016
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Governor, the markets are now pricing in the possibility -
about a 30% possibility - of there being a rate cut rather than
a hike in the next year.  You've said repeatedly that you feel
that the next move is likely to be up rather than down.  Do
you still stand by that?
Mark Carney:
Absolutely.  The whole MPC stands by that.  We've just
released our forecast which, as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, is conditioned on a market path of interest rates -
and as I think you know, Ed, we use - as a convention, we
use a 15-day average.  So we didn't use last night's market
path; we used the 15-day average up to finalising the
forecast.  And that 15-day average of the path of rates is
rates sustained at current levels for a little while longer, and
then gradually increasing father out over the horizon.
And in using that market forecast, based on our central view
of the economy, we actually don't achieve our objective.  Let
me put it a different way.  Inflation gets back to target, but
then it rises above it.  So there's not quite enough tightening
in that market path that we used in order to do what the MPC
is very clear - has been very clear about - is its objective,
which is to return inflation to target in around two years and
to keep it there - not to have an overshoot.
And the reason why that's particularly important is - right
now we have this circumstance, which we've been going
through for most of the past year - a little more than the past
year - where we have these disinflationary or deflationary
pressures coming in from abroad, and we have a gradual
build in domestic costs.  Eventually those disinflationary
pressures from abroad will wane; the domestic cost pressures
are likely to sustain, if not build, and we need to time this and
balance the two to not just bring inflation back to target, but
to do so sustainably.
So as I said, again, and we said in the Minutes and in the
Monetary Policy Summary, and was clear in the letter to the
Chancellor, the view is that more likely than not, the next
move in rates is up, and that is consistent with the forecast,
yes.
Joel Hills, ITV News:
Governor, you've made attempts in the past to manage
expectations to the likely path of interest rates.  I wonder the
degree to which you feel that perhaps your credibility has
been damaged.  When you give guidance on interest rates
now, do you think the British public takes your guidance as
serious as perhaps it did?
Mark Carney:
Well I think - a couple of things.  First, in terms of the
guidance that we've given over the course of the last two and
a half years, the first thing we did was to give guidance to
help secure the recovery.  And we've always given guidance
that's state contingent, not time contingent.  So we haven't
given pre-set timetables for rate changes; we've said that
these certain circumstances are either necessary conditions to
even think about moving rates in order to achieve the
inflation target.
So we gave guidance to help secure the recovery initially
contingent that we wouldn't even begin to think about moving
rates until unemployment had fallen to a certain level.  That
had an effect.  We know that from surveys and we know that
from the performance of the economy.  The worst that can be
said about that guidance is that more people came into work
sooner than they might otherwise have done.  So I don't
know that we're going to make any apologies for that.
Secondly, we gave guidance in terms of the overall shape of
the likely path of interest rates once they began to rise, and
that's guidance we gave about two years ago - that rates,
when they were increased, when the time came, would likely
to rise to a limited extent and at a gradual pace.  That
guidance is now so familiar; it's part of the furniture.  But it's
helpful because we know from going around the country and
talking to businesses and me with households, that people
understand both that the likely orientation of rates is rates
are going to increase as the expansion progresses, but
they're not going to rocket as they had to do in the past, and
that we'll manage this process appropriately.
We have given more guidance which is maybe of more
interest to investors, guidance around the asset purchase
facility and when - how we would use our various instruments
of monetary policy.  And that's useful guidance for those who
have to worry about those things.
And then what we've been clear on, and I think I've been
clear on - others have slight different weighting on different
factors - are what are the broad indicators that influence me
in terms of determining the stance of policy?  And so when it
was last summer where I set out a range of indicators around
domestic costs, around core inflation, around momentum in
the economy relative to the capacity of the economy.  Those
are the indicators that help inform when - at least in my
opinion - it would become the right time to raise interest
rates.
And by setting out those conditions - again, those conditions
about the state of the economy, not about the calendar -
conditions about the state of the economy, people can form a
view on whether or not we're going to move policy.  And what
you saw, for example, over the course of the fall, as the
global conditions deteriorated, as wage pressure grew a little
less rapidly than previously and as core inflation picked up a
little less rapidly - it picked up, but a little less rapidly than
expected - market participants and others, yourself, began to
push out the date of when we might raise interest rates.
That's exactly what we want to happen, because that's
exactly the way we treat policy.  We're not going to tie our
hands ever to raise or adjust - raise interest rates or adjust
policy in any way, shape or form, to a certain date.  But we
are trying to inform the markets - and most importantly,
households and businesses - in this country what's likely to
happen on rates.
And, I'll finish with this - in a situation where we have had -
and we alternate with the United States here - but where we
have had the strongest recovery in the advanced world now
over the course of the last three years, and where we've been
steadily - you know, people have been steadily finding work
and the job market has been tightening - all in an
environment of great global uncertainty and difficulty - in that
environment, it is helpful, in my opinion, for households and
businesses to recognise that it's more likely than not that
rates are going to go up and to plan their affairs accordingly.
Particularly since, while there's been tremendous progress,
British households have done a great job in paying down
debt, they are still relatively indebted, and we want to make
sure that, the collective, we do not repeat the mistakes of the
past of getting too indebted and then getting shocked -
shocked - by movements on rates.
So, no, I don' think we have anything to explain on that front.
Ben Chu, The Independent:
Governor, you and the MPC both make the point that low
headline inflation seems to have been putting some
downward pressure on wage growth, because people have
moderated their wage demands.  And you also talk about
being watchful of the risk of second round effects.  You don't
use the D word in your remarks, but these are precisely the
kind of deflationary dynamics that some have feared -
domestically generated deflationary dynamics that some have
pointed to in the past.
Although it's clearly not your central case, is it fair to say that
these risks now loom a little larger in the Bank's calculations
than they did previously?
Mark Carney:
Well, I think what has changed - we're watchful for these
issues, as we should be all the time and you're right to raise
them.  What has changed is that we've incorporated some of
these dynamics into the forecast and so you do see a more
modest pick-up in wages than previously, but still a notable
pick-up in wages.  And that's a product of the fact that we
have a tight labour market, unemployment at 5.1%, more
people employed as a proportion of the population since
records began to be held, and many other signs of
normalisation in the labour market.  So we have a tight
labour market and we think we have productivity growth
starting to pick up which should support those wage gains.
But we have incorporated more persistence of - a slower pick-
up, I should say - in terms of wages because of some of
these effects.
Now, in terms of our watching, it's not just a question of
looking at observed wages and running econometrics and
adjusting the forecasts mechanically, we also go out and we
use our agency network and talk to businesses across this
country.  And we precisely ask this question about the impact
of low inflation on the wage-setting process.  The answer
from the agents and from the businesses and, you know,
collectively and individually as we meet with them is - it's
affecting them a bit, but it's not dominating.  So I think we've
got a balanced approach to this.  It clearly is something we're
watching and will continue to watch.
And I'll finish with this - we have to be conscious though that
there are other factors that could be causing wages to pick up
a little more slowly than expected.  The composition of
employment is one example.  It's possible as well - open to
the possibility, it's not our central view - it's possible there's a
little more slack in the labour market than we think because
the natural rate of unemployment could be lower; that's
another possibility.  And it could be just the lagged effects of
slower productivity growth feeding through on wages.
So we're aware of all those things.  You know as much as we
do about the labour market.  That's the point of bringing all
these issues to the surface.  Thanks.
David Smith, Sunday Times:
Could I just follow up on that?  Two things about wages.  One
is - do you expect the national living wage to have any impact
on earnings growth in the coming months?  And secondly,
just to elaborate slightly on - when does watchfulness turn
into monetary policy action?  If wages were weak enough,
might that bring a monetary policy response?
Mark Carney:
Okay.  On the first - in terms of the national living wage, we
see - and our treatment of this has been not just to look at
those who are directly affected by the national living wage,
but also those who are close to those wages.  In other words,
our expectation is that businesses wouldn't just - I mean
obviously they've got to abide by the national living wage, but
if that bumps somebody from one pay grade up against
somebody of the next pay grade, that there would also be
some increase there as well.
Going across the numbers of people who are directly affected,
indirectly affected by this, you get into the orders of
magnitude of probably five or six million workers across this
country, including the indirect effect, the second effect.
Overall, we see the net impact of this on wages and inflation
of about 10 basis points, ultimately per annum, moving
through the forecast.  So it's something, but it's not - it's
something and it's incorporated into the forecast.
I should say - I should recognise, and as you would know
David, that there are certain sectors for which this is a much
bigger issue, given the proportion of people who are paid at
or around the minimum wage.  And we do recognise that, so
there will be some distributional things there.
In terms of watchfulness to action, I mean, the action part is
determined by all the factors that affect inflation.  And so we
have to put that into the context of that.  We are conscious -
our basic expectation, as you've seen - and it's taking a little
longer, but it's directionally happening - our basic expectation
is that domestic costs are going to continue to grow, to pick
up, consistent with that inflation target and that that will be
the dominant factor determining inflation in the medium
term.
This is the point where I have to say - of course there will be
other shocks that happen from time to time, and we'll have to
react to those shocks when they do come.  I do have to say
that, and that is reality.  But - so I wouldn't isolate this as -
it's important that we surface it, it's important that we've
incorporated it into our forecast, but I wouldn't give it a sort
of totemic status that it is the determinant of the path of
policy.  That would be overweighting both what's happened
and the reality of the inflation process, which is - there are
many factors that determine inflation.
Emily Cadman, Financial Times:
Governor, turning to credit growth and household
expectations, if households take your guidance that rates are
staying where they are for a considerable amount of time and
start to pile into credit, would you be worried and, if so, at
what level would you start to get worried?
Mark Carney:
Well, first thing is the guidance is - I mean, we have a
forecast based on a certain set of dynamics.  We have
guidance around certain indicators that would potentially shift
the stance of policy - I won't go through them again.  That's
the guidance.  It's not - you used the time - it’s not what the
guidance is, okay.  So, just - I feel I have to reinforce that.
In terms of credit growth, from the MPC's perspective, we're
obviously focused on the strength of domestic consumption;
it is the core, as is almost always the case, the core driver of
growth in the economy.  We do see the savings rate coming
down over the - as our expectation, the savings rate would
come down over the course of the forecast, that there would
be credit growth in aggregate that is around or slightly above
the pace of nominal GDP growth.  But that's in aggregate.
You have much sharper consumer credit growth, which is
principally being driven by growth in auto sales, hire purchase
arrangements for autos at present.
In terms of - so, we're interested in it, but we're interested in
it in the round in terms of the impact on the balance of supply
and demand and the outlook for inflation.  More broadly, at
the Bank, obviously The FPC takes a direct interest in this to
ensure that risks to financial stability aren't increasing.
And just - I'll finish with this - one of the things we do is we
meet from time to time, the MPC and the FPC, on issues of
mutual interest.  This is one of them, and in fact the box in
the Inflation Report, which we can talk about, goes through
some of these dynamics.  And that is something which
captures the discussion which the FPC and the MPC had.  The
assignment of responsibility starts with the FPC, though, in
terms of the vulnerabilities with monetary policy being the
last line of defence, if we felt there were an issue.
But I think, as you would have seen in the last Financial
Stability Report of the FPC in December, in terms of the top
issues, this is not the top issue - one of the top issues for the
FPC.
Kamal Ahmed, BBC:
Governor, it now looks clear that the government is very keen
on a referendum on Britain remaining in or leaving the
European Union this year.  How is that playing into the MPC's
considerations about the trajectory of growth for the UK
economy?  And in particular, could you give us the thoughts
of the MPC and yourself about the strength or otherwise of
sterling or the impact of sterling if Britain were to leave the
European Union?
Mark Carney:
Well, in terms of the way we conduct our forecast around
political events - major political events - whether it's a
general election or a Scottish Referendum or the EU
Referendum, we assume the status quo.  And you wouldn't
expect us to speculate on outcomes or alternative projections
associated with different outcomes.
Now, that doesn't mean that these political events don't
affect the forecast.  But the way they affect the forecast is
through how they affect asset prices including in the
exchange rate, and how they affect household and business
confidence.
So what we do in the forecast obviously is we take asset
prices where they are and we take those confidence
indicators, which at present for the latter - there's not yet a
big risk premium built into business and household confidence
around the Referendum.  We do see in the exchange rate
market, and it's observed in the Report, that there has been
some minor protection, if you will, around the Referendum.
You see it in the skews in options markets around sterling
and particularly around cable, that have moved notably since
December, consistent with the existence of a Referendum.
We don't have a forecast for sterling - period.  And we
certainly don't have a forecast for sterling in the event of a
political event on which we're not conditioning our forecast.
So, I'll leave it at that.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:
Governor, earlier you alluded to your Lincoln speech where
you said that the Rate decision would come into sharper focus
around the turn of the year, clearly the picture's got a bit
blurred around the turn of the year.  I just wondered when
you now think the Rate decision's going to come back into
sharper focus again.  Because if guidance is going to mean
anything, people have to have some idea about what the
Bank's thinking is.
Mark Carney:
You know, Larry, I think the point of that turn of phrase,
which was part of a speech that laid out a whole framework in
terms of the dynamics of the inflation process and those
elements of - those indicators of inflation; aside from having
a chunk of history about the Magna Carta, but we'll set that
to one side - the point of that was to give a sense of how
those dynamics would affect inflation and how we would
potentially react.  And given our forecast at the time - given
the Bank's forecast at the time - when those indicators, based
on that forecast and the forecast that came out in August,
when those indicators would be in the region where that
decision would get more difficult - okay - come into sharper
relief - become more difficult or become quite easy.
The decision came into sharper relief - from my perspective -
came into sharper relief, it was quite an easy decision.  The
decision is whether or not to raise interest rates; it was an
easy decision not to raise interest rates.  You know, now is
not the time to raise interest rates because we haven't had
sufficient, in my judgement, and for various different reasons
the judgement of everyone else on the Monetary Policy
Committee, we haven't had sufficient build in domestic cost
growth.  The economy is using up slack, but there's still a bit
more to be done there.  And core inflation has - while it's
picked up - it hasn't picked up quite enough, and that's a
product probably of the persistence of exchange rate paths
and a few other factors.
But the value of that - the value of that guidance is to give a
sense of how we will react to events.  Everyone in this room
will have a slightly different view, in some cases markedly
different view, of the outlook for the economy.  To the extent
we're telling you what influence, how we would react to those
states of the economy, you can form a view on interest rates
and we can give a general sense of where things are likely to
happen.
We have a view - our forecast today in effect says that we
think that if our central view of the outlook for the economy
comes to pass, we will need to raise interest rates to a limited
degree and at a gradual pace in order to keep inflation - not
just get it to target, but to keep it there.
If you have a radically different view of the economy, you can
form a different perspective on the path of rates.  What we
can assure you is that, when it comes time to make each
decision, we won't be bound by something we've said in the
past; we'll make a decision based on achieving that target.
Thanks.
Paul Mason, Channel 4 News:
I mean, however you see it, the market sees monetary policy
of this institution as Rates, QE plus signalling.  And therefore
guidance is a kind of euphemism in this sense, isn't it?  What
has happened during your tenure as the Governor is that you
have, through signalling, twice loosened policy.  Now that is
welcome to those of us who are worried about the downside
risk, and in particular the financial market risks outlined in
the Inflation Report box that the FPC and the MPC have been
concerned about.
But the question becomes then - why not use more signalling
because the signalling has been effective?  In other words,
what is the substance of what you effectively did in that last
speech?
Mark Carney:
Well, let me say a few things.  One is - the substance of what
I said in the last speech was to give an accounting of how the
economy had performed relative to some criteria that I had
set out six months earlier.  And you can judge how well it's
accounted for, but - and by giving that accounting, I think
that updates and reinforces and flushes out, if you will, my
reaction function - to use the technical term - how I would be
expected to react, depending on how the economy performs.
The second thing is that the package of information we
release four times a year in effect provides guidance,
provides a perspective, provides more information about the
current reaction function of the MPC as a whole, not just
myself.
And the third things is - you know, in terms of the overall
performance of - if you look at short rates in this economy at
a time of great volatility - I mean, it is not an understatement
to say there is, you know, tremendous volatility in the global
economy, more broadly in financial markets and there is not
volatility, but there has been quite a bit of uncertainty in
terms of the real economy, particularly around the supply
side - a point that Ben Broadbent has made far more
eloquently and to much a better grounding than I will.  At a
time of all that, if you look at the volatility of short sterling, if
you look at one year forward volatility, it's half of what it was
in the 10 years preceding my arrival at this institution.
It has come down - now you do want volatility, because there
are going to be shocks and you don't know.  But we have
provided guidance, we have provided frameworks, we have
provided more information.  We are obviously constantly, as
a Committee and as individuals, looking for better ways to
provide that information.  But there has been a movement
down.  There always will be volatility in financial markets;
there always will be events that move around the likely path
of monetary policy, whether it's in the UK, the US, the euro
area, China.  And we have to react to it.  All we can do is
inform as best as we can, not just the financial markets but in
a way that's digestible - very importantly, in my view - for
the general public, those who we really serve - all of us really
serve - a way that they can understand both likely paths and
what can change those paths.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
There seems to be a contradiction in the Inflation Report that
I hope you could resolve.
Mark Carney:
Well I'm sure Dr Broadbent would be very happy to do that.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
Ben, one for you then.  But in it you talk about spare capacity
being eliminated by the end of this year, and then if you look
at the projections off the market yield curve which obviously
in the Report isn’t as severe as it is today, that seems to
suggest that the first lift-off wouldn’t be until halfway through
2017 at the earliest.  Yet elimination of spare capacity by the
end of this year would suggest that you’d get interest rate
rises much earlier.  So which is it?  Should we be looking at
spare capacity and ignoring the yield curve?
Mark Carney:
No, I am going to pass to Ben, but this is a very welcome
question because this is an extremely important point to
understand.
Ben Broadbent:
Well the main answer is there's absolutely no mechanical link
between the level of the output gap and the appropriate level
of interest rate.  So there is no contradiction at all.  And
indeed, even to the extent there was a reasonable correlation
prior to the financial crisis - even then, it wasn’t the only the
thing; inflation mattered, obviously, inflation expectations
and so forth.  But I would say - not just since the financial
crisis but even before, there have been big variations,
generally declines, in what you might call the neutral rate of
interest.  And we have to take those into account.
You know, we could have had a zero output gap 20 years ago
and the level of interest rates, the appropriate level of
interest rates, would have been completely different - indeed
it was completely different.  So I think it’s a mistake to
imagine there's some simple mechanical link between a single
indicator, whether indeed that’s wage growth or the output
gap, and interest rates.  And if there were then we wouldn’t
have to write these reports and sit there and think about lots
of things, not just one.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
There wasn’t fuzzy guidance based on the output gap - that
was poor guidance part two because a lot of it was spare
capacity anyway.
Ben Broadbent:
Not at all.  I’ll reiterate what the Governor said a moment
ago.  Read first of all what the guidance actually said okay.  It
said that the Committee judges that the path of interest rates
that is likely to be necessary to meet our objectives will be
shallower than it was in the past and end up at a lower level.
That’s what it said.  It said no more than that.  It certainly
said nothing time specific; it didn’t introduce the output gap
quotes.  The earlier phase had unemployment in it, but that
wasn’t a sufficient condition for rate changes either, it was
just a necessary condition.  So I just don’t think that’s right
as a premise.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:
Going back to Brexit and the Referendum, if I may, and
particularly on business spending and investment intentions.
The minutes note that the referendum presents a downside
risk in the near term to business spending, yet goes on to say
that intentions had not softened significantly thus far.  I'm
just wondering how real you think this risk is and whether
you actually think that possibly, as is the case with the
Scottish Referendum, businesses will just carry on investing
through the period to the Referendum and beyond?
Mark Carney:
Well we’ll have to see, Hugo.  And it will be a product of how
the campaign unfolds, and we will see.  In terms of what we
assume, based on the existing surveys and the relationship
with those surveys to the path of business investment, and
based on some fundamental factors - very high return on
capital, the fact that there's relatively little, in our judgement
relatively little spare capacity in the economy, we expect, as
you've noted, a pretty smart rate of growth of business
investment certainly relative to historic growth rates.  I think
growth rates in the 6% per annum area versus kind of 2.5%
per annum historic growth rates.
We’ll update that as events transpire, but that is our base
case expectation.  And as I said earlier to an earlier question,
we’re not conducting a hypothetical exercise of - we’re not
predicting an outcome, we’re using our straight convention
which we use for every major political event, whether it’s a
general election or Scottish referendum in that example, of
just assuming the status quo as the base case, as the only
case.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:
You don’t appear too concerned about business investment
taking a major hit between now and a referendum whether -
Mark Carney:
Well we haven’t picked it up - we’re being, if you will,
mechanical, not predictive, with respect to this issue because
to be otherwise - we don’t have a basis to be otherwise but
also, let’s be honest, to be otherwise would be to potentially
wade into a political debate where we don’t belong.
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News: Governor, the MPC has today emphasised the near term
downside risks a lot, which obviously has pushed back the
prospect for an interest rate increase, but might the medium
term risks, which makes now inflation come back to the
target quicker, mean - make later means less gradual, faster
rate increases when they do come, especially if these
downside risks don’t materialise?
Mark Carney:
In terms of the path with which we set policy, we look at the
mode as opposed to the mean.  So we haven’t incorporated
the downside risks into our central projection.  So we’re
looking at the most likely measured as the mode, as opposed
to the mean; we’ve always done that by convention.
Are there upside risks to inflation?  Yes, there are upside risks
to inflation.  We talked earlier - and it was useful to have the
discussion - but we talked about this assumption that wage
growth is shallower, the pickup in wage growth is shallower
than we previously had expected because of some sort of -
some elements of second round effects, early elements of
second round effects.  That may not transpire.  It is possible
there is a variety of scenarios one could have in terms of a
better outcome for global growth, more momentum
domestically.  And any of those, less spare capacity than we
currently think, could result in higher cost growth and a
tighter path of policy.
Now to go back to the earlier discussion, Larry’s and other
people’s questions, by laying out some of the elements that
would influence our reaction to that, if you start to see those
things develop, if, you know, labour costs pick up more
smartly, if core inflation - if there's less pass through from
the past depreciation of sterling, for example, and core
inflation rises more rapidly, or just the economy grows more
rapidly than we expect, well then all things being equal one
would expect that policy would be tighter both in terms of
timing and amplitude.  But we’ll see and we can’t do more
than that.
Szu Chan, The Telegraph:
Just to get back to the flip side of the scenario that you
presented and the risk that low inflation becomes entrenched
in wage expectations, etc., I know you just said that you
can’t look at just one data point alone, you look at a range of
factors, but when does low inflation start to become a worry
for the Committee and what is your message for employees
and employers as they start to negotiate the wage round for
this year?
Mark Carney:
I’ll ask Ben to …
Ben Broadbent:
Just to reiterate what the Governor has said.  What we did in
the forecast is make a small adjustment for what we perceive
probably as a small effect, negative, but not that big of low
rates of inflation on actual pay settlements.
Now the pay data themselves are pretty volatile, there are all
sorts of things that influence them so it’s not possible to say
with certainty this is what’s happening.  We’ve made some
allowance for it and therefore have a slower rate of growth of
wages and unit costs certainly through the course of this
year.  So I don’t think we should overemphasise the risks of
this.
Wage growth has picked up; unit cost growth has picked up
on any measure.  There's a chart I can point you to showing
that.  Some of the fears, great fears were expressed in this
room a year ago about deflation and people deferring
consumption, I remember a whole host of questions about
that simply haven’t come true.
So it is something we watch.  We have obviously a
responsibility to watch inflation expectations, how they’re
influencing wages.  It’s a sort of core part of the job of the
monetary policy maker.  But I don’t think there's any simple
level at which it suddenly switches to becoming the overriding
concern.
Geoff Cutmore, CNBC:
Governor, I wonder if I could ask you to address just the
international context a little bit more here.  Clearly from the
Minutes, the Committee spent a lot of time thinking about the
volatility in risky assets at the moment, concerns around the
slowing growth in China and emerging markets, the risk of
liquidity problems in capital markets particularly secondary
bond markets.  I wonder to what extent the Committee is
taking this into consideration as it shapes policy, rather than
the domestic context, given that you've actually said there is
quite a lot that’s robust in the UK right now?  So are you
making policy for the international context rather than the
domestic at this stage, and if so, what do you fear and what
do the markets fear?
Mark Carney:
Thanks, Geoff.  I mean the first thing I’ll say is, as I said at
the outset, this is one of the most open economies in the
world and it has the leading global financial centre housed in
it.  So international factors, the trajectory of the global
economy, global financial conditions are very important for
the UK.  And the deterioration in the global outlook has had
an impact on our forecast.  It’s something that we have been
concerned about for some time.  We’ve tended to have a
lower global forecast than the IMF, for example, and others.
We have a lower - that’s again the case with this forecast and
we do see some downside risk.
I would say that in terms of global dynamics, if you step back
in terms of financial market dynamics, at the core of these is
a - I believe, we believe, that they stem from concerns about
the growth trajectories in China and major emerging markets
and the potential amplification of that to advanced
economies.  And questions in terms of the ability of policy to
respond to those concerns.
The distinction we would make is that we have a very
different - we’re in a very different position - as I tried to do
at the outset than we were seven years ago, in terms of both
the health of the system, of the financial system, the
improvement in balance sheets corporate and personal and
the amount of momentum, sustainable momentum, that is
there in the economy.  So, Geoff, we obviously have to blend
the two.
The last point I would make and actually, Minouche, ask you
to just amplify on this.  In terms of market liquidity, I mean
let me cite it for the Monetary Policy Committee first and then
Minouche can talk more generally about what’s going on
there.  In terms of influencing monetary policy, we would
need to see a persistent shift in market liquidity that would
create a permanent wedge or a persistent wedge, if you will,
in terms of borrowing costs that flowed through to the United
Kingdom.  And all things being equal that would influence the
stance of monetary policy.
I would note that for a long time we have been saying as a
Committee that one of the many reasons why we expect the
neutral interest rate of which Ben spoke to rise to a limited
extent is that we expect that wedge to come in as a
consequence of a series of changes that have been made.
But I wonder, Minouche, if you just want to expand for a
minute on some of the drivers of this market liquidity and
what we’re doing more broadly as a Bank on it, because it’s
an important issue.
Minouche Shafik:
Well I mean, as you well know there are concerns about
market liquidity partly attributed to changes in regulation on
the leverage ratio, but also around structural changes in the
way markets operate, particularly the rise in high frequency
trading and the fact that the structure of some of these
markets has changed.  Now the FPC has an extensive stream
of work on various aspects of this, and we are paying quite a
lot of attention to changes in market liquidity and how that
might affect markets in the UK.
Mario Blascak,
World Business Press Online:
Governor we saw you revising down the unemployment
forecast below the 5% equilibrium rate.  At the same time,
how low do you think the unemployment in the UK should fall
to put the upward pressure on the closely watched earnings
or wages growth?  And in what other segments of the labour
market do you see the slack remaining?
Mark Carney:
We did an assessment of the overall degree of slack in the
economy; we just had a periodic so-called supply stock take.
And so we looked pretty hard at the labour market as a
whole.  We made a couple of determinations in that.  One is
that we took down a bit our expectations around
participation, the participation rate in the economy.  We had
had quite a relatively high level.  And we also took a signal
from recent behaviour in the labour market in terms of hours
worked of individuals because we’re seeing a normalisation in
patterns.  People had been taking less leave than historic or
than on offer, and there's been some normalisation of that
and to an extent that it mattered.
In both respects there is still some marginal slack there but
very limited, as we indicated.  In November we felt there was
around a half a percentage point of slack.  We now think it’s
less than that, there's a little more than zero but not so much
that it can’t be eliminated over the course of the year.
And in fact, as you rightly point out, over the course of the
forecast we expect on average that the unemployment rate
would fall below 5%, below that current estimate of the
natural rate.
Now we will be very interested to see, as everyone will, in
terms of how wage costs evolve, if this comes to pass, and
also how job matching and job churn and other indicators
evolve.  There are reasonable arguments on both sides of this
to suggest that the natural rate or the NAIRU - different
concept but similar - has actually fallen in this economy over
the course of the last several years because of a series of
reforms to labour markets and the nature of work and other
factors.  We’re alive to that possibility.  For the purposes of
this forecast we’ve made a judgement to which we all adhere,
that we’ve kept that assumption at 5%.  But we do expect
that the actual outturn will be below that.  We’ll see what
happens to a variety of other indicators and we’ll update as
appropriate.  Thanks.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk:
Just with regards to your tenure and when it finishes, if we
look at the market forecasts at the moment, the first Rate
move is seen for mid-2018 now, so I'm pricing up a 30%
chance of a Rate cut by the end of your tenure.  Are you
worried that you could become the first Governor since I
think 1944 to 1949, Thomas Catto, to leave rates unchanged
for his whole tenure?
Mark Carney:
Well no, I think what’s important to all of us - and we had a
colleague on the MPC, David Miles, who went through two
terms on the MPC without raising interest rates.  He did a lot
of other things - quantitative easing - other range of work
and took judgements every single meeting of the right stance
of policy.  I think the important thing for all of us is that we
set policy in a way that maximises the likelihood that we’re
going to achieve our objectives, and that’s how ultimately
we’re going to be judged.
As whether it’s monetary policy, or even more so with respect
to financial stability policy or supervisory policy, you can only
really be assessed quite some time after your term has
finished, so it’s not about action for action’s sake; it’s about
the right stance of policy.  And with this institution and its
broad range of powers, it’s a huge suite of policies that we
have to, through the various committees in which I
participate, to try to get right to ensure in the end what we’re
delivering is monetary and financial stability, and in that way
supporting strong, sustainable and balanced growth in the
United Kingdom.  And that’s how we’ll be judged.
Yvonne Esterházy,
German Businessweek:
A follow up to the EU referendum, it looks increasingly likely
that it will happen in a few months' time now, and I was just
wondering - apart from forecasts and investments where you
don’t want to say anything - but could you elaborate a little
bit on your plans, your contingency plans within the Bank, for
this big event?  Clearly the markets are showing some
concern and it would be a shock if there were a vote for
Brexit.
Mark Carney:
There's a very long list of things around the EU referendum
about which we don’t want to say anything.  And with respect
to contingency plans, of course we have contingency plans
around potential market events, potential shocks, both those
that we can identify and generic ones.  And the EU
referendum falls into the camp of an identifiable one.
As always is the case, it serves no one to talk at length about
the specifics of those contingency plans in advance, and so
we’ll adhere to that convention.  What we do have a
commitment to do though is after events have passed, as
appropriate, we do disclose what we had done, and that was
the case with the Scottish referendum where we provided a
record of the discussions at the Financial Policy Committee
around contingency planning for the Scottish referendum, and
you can expect something similar.
Sam Nussey, Nikkei:
Governor, with the BOJ having joined the ECB Switzerland,
Sweden, Denmark, and having used negative rates, do you
see negative rates as part of the BOE’s arsenal and could you
envisage a situation in which they would be used?
Mark Carney:
Well let me start that discussion we had as the MPC was
whether now was the right time to raise interest rates.  And
the judgement, as you've seen nine to nil, was that now was
not the right time to raise interest rates, but we had a
forecast - we have a forecast - which requires some increases
in interest rates in order to sustainably achieve the inflation
target.  That’s the first point.
The second point is that we have provided guidance on the
use of Bank Rate and where we think the effect of lower
bound is on Bank Rate.  We updated that guidance in the
spring of last year, that we felt that time had moved on from
2009/10 and because of the improvement in the banking
system, particularly the building society sector, that we could
lower Bank Rate further.  So we’re not at the effect of lower
bound at this stage.
As an institution, we will always review our facilities from
time to time and refresh them as appropriate.  As the
Monetary Policy Committee, we have not had discussions
about potentially using those instruments, for the obvious
reason of the orientation of policy is in a different direction.
One of the advantages of a day like today - and I know one of
the disadvantages of a day like today is you all had to come
in at nine in the morning and get locked up in the sub vault
and probably treated quite poorly and had to read a bunch of
documents, but in those documents are included the Minutes
of the Monetary Policy meetings.  So you know in real time
that we didn’t discuss that possibility at the meeting, and the
orientation was, as I say, in a different direction.  So you will
know if that point comes as even a conceptual discussion.
Thanks.
Chris Papadopoullos, City AM:
Given the compositional things that are impacting
productivity and the average weekly earnings figures, why
are they being given so much attention?  As in why are
people so worried that they’re low given the compositional
effects that are keeping them low?
Mark Carney:
I'm going to pass to Ben to speak to this, but I’ll just say on a
high level - I mean obviously it’s important for those who are
affected by it, those who are in those positions.  And it’s
important that, if I can put it this way, we’re not misled by
composite.  We have to understand why there are certain
dynamics in terms of wages and productivity, and not
misinterpret those dynamics, because if it weren’t
compositional effects, it could be higher slack, it could be this
persistent second round effect, it could be other factors that
are dampening on wages.
So it’s important to understand, because it’s a material
dynamic in the economy in our view.  And as I say, from a
policy perspective, a compositional effect is basically awash in
terms of the impact on policy, whereas these other effects
can influence the path of the policy.  But Ben, do you want to
…?
Ben Broadbent:
Yeah I think this is an important point to remember the
number of things that can affect wage growth, even the very
sort of concept of what wage growth is.  So the AWE does not
represent the pay growth of some representative individual.
And you’re right that if the composition of the workforce
changes, indeed if average hours change, that will affect
AWE, even if the hourly pay of no single individual changes.
And you can see - there's a chart on the top of page 25
where you can see our estimates of those compositional
effects; they’ve been pulling down on wage growth.  At other
times they were pushing up.  Average hours have also been
pulling down on AWE growth, at the same time in addition to
this.
But as the Governor pointed out, I think one important point
to bear in mind is that our broad assessment is that these
have similar effects on AWE growth and on per capita
productivity growth, and that’s one of the reasons we pay
quite a lot of attention to unit costs which is the ratio of the
two.  There's no first order impact on those.
And you know it’s worth bearing in mind, although we’ll have
dipped down a little on the fourth quarter of the year, you
look - flip forward to page 29 you can see that unit costs have
been accelerating, that growth rate has been picking up.  So
it is an important point you've made and we certainly do our
best to take it into account.
Jenny Scott:
That’s all we’ve got time for.  Thank you very much everyone.
