INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE
Thursday 2nd February 2017
Opening Remarks by the Governor
Good afternoon.
The biggest determinants of the UK’s medium-term prosperity will be the country’s new
relationship with the EU and the reforms that it catalyses.
These processes will also have a significant bearing on inflation over the next few years.
Market participants’ views regarding this economy’s future growth potential will influence
asset prices, particularly the exchange rate. Firms’ assessments of the outlook for demand and
the ease of future trade will affect their investments. Households’ confidence in their
economic situation will help determine their spending.  And, with time, the UK economy’s
supply will be affected by a new set of trading arrangements with the EU and other countries.
The MPC has long emphasised that the effects of the process of leaving the EU on inflation
would be the product of its impact on demand, supply and the exchange rate.  And it has
consistently stressed that as a result, the implications for monetary policy would not be
automatic.
During these exceptional circumstances, the MPC is required by its remit to balance a period
of above-target inflation with a period of weaker growth. The primary objective of monetary
policy remains inflation control, however, which means any overshoot of inflation above the
target can only be temporary in nature and limited in scope. As such, the MPC has been clear
that its tolerance for above-target inflation is limited.
Today’s decision reflects the Committee’s updated assessment of those forces and those
limits. The Committee has unanimously confirmed that the current monetary stance remains
appropriate.  But it has also made important revisions to its forecast and highlighted some of
the key judgements underlying it.
1. Demand developments and outlook
Growth has remained resilient since the referendum, with the UK posting the fastest rate in
the G7 last year.
The MPC expects growth to be stronger over the forecast period than in November, with the
economy now projected to expand by 2.0% in 2017 and around 1.75% thereafter. This upgrade
will leave the level of UK output around 1% higher over the next three years than expected in
November.
This stronger outlook is the product of four factors, in descending order of importance.
First, the Chancellor’s Autumn Statement eased fiscal policy over the coming years. This
explains about half of our forecast upgrade.
Second, the outlook for the global economy is firmer, reflecting an easing of fiscal policy in
other major economies together with improvements in financial conditions and business
confidence, particularly in the United States. This explains more than a quarter of the
upgrade.
Third, financial conditions in the UK remain supportive, underpinned by low risk-free rates,
the 18% fall in sterling since its November 2015 peak, and lower credit spreads. Moreover,
domestic credit conditions are accommodative, reinforced by strong competition in consumer
credit markets and historically low mortgage rates. In part this reflects Bank of England
policy actions, which have also helped lower the impact of uncertainty on activity.
Fourth, as was the case in November, there are few signs that households are cutting back
spending ahead of the coming squeeze in their real incomes. With the savings rate falling
towards pre-crisis lows and household debt picking up, how households adjust their spending
and their expectations of future income will be important determinants of the outlook.
This stronger projection doesn’t mean the referendum is without consequence.
Uncertainty over future arrangements is weighing on business investment, which has been
flat since the end of 2015.  Business investment is expected to be around a quarter lower in
three years’ time than projected prior to the referendum, with material consequences for
productivity, wages and incomes.
More broadly, the level of GDP is still expected to be 1.5% lower in two years’ time than
projected in May, despite the substantial easing of monetary, macroprudential and fiscal
policies.
Financial markets are already pricing in a material adjustment to the UK’s economic
prospects, as evidenced by the sharp fall in the value of sterling.  Markets are valuing today
what they expect to be necessary tomorrow: an adjustment to real incomes as the UK moves
towards its new trading arrangements. The MPC expects the tension between current
consumer strength and relative financial market pessimism to begin to be resolved over the
course of this year.
2. Inflation outlook
Having risen markedly from around zero in 2015, the MPC still expects CPI inflation to be
back to around 2% in the data for February. This largely reflects external factors – in
particular, past falls in energy, food and other imported goods prices dropping out of the
annual comparison.
Beyond that, inflation is expected to increase further, peaking around 2.8% at the start of
2018, before falling gradually back to 2.4% in three years’ time.  This overshoot is entirely
because of sterling’s fall, which itself is the product of the market’s view of the consequences
of Brexit.
Consistent with this, longer-term measures of inflation expectations have risen over the past
year from very low levels to stabilise around historical average levels, and remain well
anchored.
3. Supply outlook
The outlook for inflation depends importantly on the path for supply, which is why the MPC
undertakes regular, detailed assessments of these prospects. It has incorporated the latest
results in today’s projections.
Following a long period of consistently overestimating wage growth, the MPC has updated
its view of the natural rate of unemployment. Specifically, the MPC now judges that the rate
of unemployment the economy can achieve while being consistent with sustainable rates of
wage growth to be around 4.5%, down from around 5% previously.
As a result, the stronger outlook for demand is in large part matched by an increase in the
economy’s estimated supply capacity, and the net impact of these two factors on the inflation
projection is broadly neutral.
As a consequence, when taken together with the 3% appreciation of sterling since our last
forecast and the gently rising path for interest rates implied by market yields, the projections
for inflation – and the trade-off that the Committee faces – are little changed relative to
November.
4. Policy decision
Monetary policy cannot prevent either any structural adjustments that are necessary as the
UK moves to new trading arrangements or any consequences of those adjustments for real
incomes. In the shorter run specifically, attempting to offset fully the effect of weaker sterling
on inflation would be achievable only at the cost of higher unemployment and even weaker
income growth.
In such exceptional circumstances, the MPC’s remit specifies that it must balance the speed
with which it intends to return inflation to the target with the support that monetary policy
provides to jobs and activity. At its February meeting, the MPC unanimously judged that it
remained appropriate to seek to return inflation to the target over a somewhat longer period
than usual, and that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to balance the
demands of the Committee’s remit.
As the Committee has previously noted, however, there are limits to the extent that above-
target inflation can be tolerated.  The projections described in the February Inflation Report,
and the continuing suitability of the current policy stance, depend crucially on three
judgements:
 that the lower level of sterling continues to boost consumer prices broadly as
expected, and without adverse consequences for inflation expectations further ahead;
 that regular pay growth does indeed remain modest, consistent with the Committee’s
updated assessment of the degree of slack in the labour market;  and
 that the hitherto resilient rates of household spending growth slow as real income
gains weaken.
In judging the appropriate policy stance, the Committee will be monitoring closely the
incoming evidence regarding these and other factors.  For instance, if spending growth slows
more abruptly than expected, there is scope for monetary policy to be loosened.  If, on the
other hand, pay growth picks up by more than anticipated, monetary policy may need to be
tightened to a greater degree than implied by current market yields.
More generally, monetary policy can respond, in either direction, to changes to the economic
outlook as they unfold to ensure a sustainable return of inflation to the 2% target.
5. Conclusion
Following the referendum, the Bank eased macroprudential and monetary policies in order to
support households and businesses during a period of initial uncertainty and eventual
adjustment to the country’s new relationship with the EU.  That stimulus is working.  The
cost of borrowing is down, availability of credit is up, and some of the impact of uncertainty
on households and businesses has been mitigated.
The Brexit journey is really just beginning.  While the direction of travel is clear, there will
be twists and turns along the way.  Whatever happens, monetary policy will be set to return
inflation sustainably to target while supporting the necessary adjustments in the economy.  At
this week’s meeting, the MPC maintained its policy stance.  If circumstances warrant a
change in policy, we will act consistent with our remit.
