Bank of England
Inflation Report Q&A
3 November 2016
Noreena Hertz, ITV News:
Governor, in the Report it makes clear that you expect prices
for fuel, food and clothing to go up significantly, mainly due
to the exchange rate and the import effect.
For how long do you feel that the British public should
tolerate these rising prices before you act, and by act I'm
really saying - before you increase interest rates?
Mark Carney:
Well, the judgement of the MPC has been that the degree of
accommodation that is currently being provided is
appropriate.  It's appropriate because of the pressures that
are weighing down on activity and it's appropriate because of
the forces that are causing inflation to rise and rise above
that 2% target.
The reason that inflation is above target - or will be above
target, in our judgement at years two and three, is because
of the exchange rate.  The reason the exchange rate has
moved - the predominant reason why the exchange rate has
moved, in our judgement - is judgements that have been
made in financial markets about the future of the real
economy, not of the stance of monetary policy - how open
this economy will be, what our trading relationships will be,
how productivity will evolve over the next few years.
We can't influence those perceptions in markets again, I'll
emphasise they're perceptions in markets.  It's still early days
in this process.  The negotiations haven't even yet begun, so
we don't know exactly what the arrangements are going to
be, nor do markets - they're making a judgement around
them.
But we can't influence those real factors.  We have to take
into account their impact on inflation.  And the judgement, as
I said, and as we say in the Report, that we've had to make is
- do we fully lean against them and cause much higher
joblessness and much lower wages for those who have jobs?
Or do we accommodate some of that overshoot, given that
it's caused by a real effect?  And that's the judgement that
the MPC has taken.
Kamal Ahmed, BBC:
Governor, you have - the Monetary Policy Committee has
upgraded growth for this year, upgraded growth for next
year, but has actually downgraded growth for 2018.  So,
could you give us your judgement about whether this is
economic pain delayed or economic pain cancelled?  And
could you give us as well just your initial reaction to the court
judgement on Article 50 and parliamentary sovereignty?
Does this simply increase the uncertainty around Britain's exit
from the European Union, which you say is one of the most
significant issues in terms of the economic future for the UK?
Mark Carney:
Well, maybe I’ll start with the second, which is - obviously I'm
not qualified to comment on the court judgement or the
prospects here, but it is an example of the uncertainty that
will characterise this process.  As I said to the previous
question, the negotiations themselves haven't even yet
begun.  There will be uncertainty, there will be volatility
around those negotiations as they proceed, and I would just
view this as one of the symptoms - one example of that
uncertainty.
And what we have in the Report - if I can move to your first
question and our forecast - is that that uncertainty does bear
down on business investment; that that effect builds with
time; that lower business investment has consequences for
employment ultimately; it has consequences for productivity,
although, if I can just parenthetically mention that we do see
productivity growth picking up over course of the forecast.
Where we see the bigger adjustment is with households in
that we see very modest real income growth over the course
of next year and into 2018, because of the combination of
weaker overall activity and the increase in inflation.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:
Governor, the downgrade in the forecast towards the end of
the forecast horizon is essentially driven by the assumption
that we're going to get a harder Brexit than you thought in
August.  The Prime Minister hasn't said that, no one's said
that.  Isn't this a bit presumptuous of officials to make that
call, and doesn't this mean you're just covering your back for
forecasts you got wrong in August?
Mark Carney:
Well, thanks for the question.  This is an important issue,
obviously.  We have not changed our assumption of what
type of Brexit the UK will have.  And I think we should
recognise that, for the way we run our forecast, that
assumption is relevant offstage.  So much longer than the
forecast horizon - it's a medium to long term assumption.
And we have basically taken a weighted average of various
outcomes - potential outcomes.  We used the same one as we
used in August.  So, we haven't changed that.
So why is supply basically in the same place?  And I'd
emphasise that.  The overall level of activity ends up roughly
the same level - a little stronger earlier, as per the previous
question; weaker growth later on, but the level of GDP is
basically the same.  It's -.2 lower, but basically in the same
place.
And the overall level of supply is consistent with that.  What
we have is a slightly larger output gap at that point, at the
end of the forecast.  We have a slightly faster adjustment; we
have more supply early in the forecast, stronger growth in
the short term - and some of that, our view is supply in the
economy - and a slightly faster adjustment over the balance
of the forecast, which ends us up in basically the same place,
on a path to exactly the same place as we'd assumed in
August.
So again, just to hammer the point - we haven't changed our
assumption about what type of Brexit we're going to have at
all.  And it would be - I don't know if it's presumptuous or
just - it's far too soon to make that judgement, I agree.  As I
said, the negotiations haven't even yet begun and it's all to
play for.
The reason we have - and I'll finish with this - the reason we
have a slightly faster adjustment to that end state is that of
course we've been out talking to businesses and particularly
those businesses that have large exposures to the European
Union.  And we're more informed, as you would expect - not
fully informed - but more informed than we were in August -
about the relative pace of adjustment for those businesses.
And that has helped inform our assumptions on how things
move.
Last point I'll make, which is that financial markets, as you
appreciate, have made a much bigger revision to their views
of the type of Brexit or the degree of openness that this
economy will have, and its consequences for supply and
growth than certainly we have.  We've made this modest
adjustment just on the transition.  And those are judgements
in financial markets; they're not based on actual facts
because, again, this process has not really yet begun.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:
Back in August the MPC was signalling that there would be
further easing of policy before the end of the year.  You've
now said that guidance has expired.  You've said there's a
limit to the amount of inflation you're prepared to tolerate.
Is the message here one to the Chancellor, which is - we're
done here, Chancellor for the time being, over to you?
Mark Carney:
No, the message is - to be absolutely clear in terms of fiscal
policy - as we've said many times and it will always remain
true - we take fiscal policy as given and then we optimise
around fiscal policy.  Monetary policy can react much more
quickly than the fiscal side.  That's the first point.
The second is that our stance of policy will be a product of
what happens to supply, demand and the exchange rate.  We
would include inflation expectations in that determination as
well. And we will learn about that as we go, and it's the
balance of those that determine whether or not additional
easing or some other - or potentially tightening - would be
appropriate.  What's happened between now and August is
that demand has been stronger.  We haven't learnt much
about supply; we end up in roughly the same place on supply
as per my answer just to Chris.  And we have higher inflation
overshoot because of the bigger exchange rate move.
The balance of that leaves the MPC in a position where we've
decided that the stance of policy at present is appropriate and
that we have a neutral bias around policy going forward.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
Governor, gilt yields have risen significantly since the August
package and corporate bond yields have also shot up, so I
just wondered if you feel that your stimulus has failed in the
face of more powerful political forces and whether monetary
policy as a whole has shot its bolt?
Mark Carney:
On the second point, no, we have - we retain many options.
If it were appropriate, if it were to become appropriate to
provide additional stimulus, we retain options.  We can cut
Bank Rate further; we could do additional asset purchases in
a range of assets, if that were appropriate - I'm not signalling
that it is appropriate, but we have options and we can provide
that stimulus.  And the stimulus that we provided in August
does mean that financial conditions - or it has helped
contribute to financial conditions which, on the whole, are still
more stimulative than they were prior to the package.
The reason for - there's two elements - well, there's more
than two, but I would signal two elements to the shift in gilt
yields.  First is changes to inflation compensation.  We
reference in the Report, and I did in my opening remarks,
that returning to historic averages, it is something we're
monitoring closely.  And secondly, you know, improved near
term growth prospects.  So overall, the balance is
appropriate.
Geoff Cutmore, CNBC:
I'm surprised that nobody has raised the issue about your
future.  I know you've attempted to draw a line under the
speculation with the announcement earlier this week.  But for
a while your presence at the Bank became the story, rather
than the Bank's policy.  So in the light of that, can I ask you -
does something need to change about the way the Bank and
the government work hand in fist, the way that the Governor
and the Chancellor need to communicate?
And secondly, could you be encouraged to stay for a couple
more years and fulfil the full term if things are going well in
2019?
Mark Carney:
No, I think we should - I think we've all had enough of that
saga, so let's not reopen it with the second part of your
question.
In terms of the framework here, the framework - this is an
outstanding framework for the conduct not just of monetary
policy but broader macroprudential policy and microprudential
supervision.  Clear, delegated authority to technocrats
effectively, but those with an accountability mechanism,
tested via the parliament, accountability to yourselves, the
British people, through the media, through what we produce.
And being held to account: being held to account for a
forecast, being held to account for our outcomes.
And so I don't think the framework needs to change.  I think
it works quite well, and I think further that over the course of
the last year, with the 2016 Bank of England Act and, if you
will, the equalisation of the governance of the three
Committees - of the FPC, the PRA and the MPC - in both the
way they receive remits, the format of their accountability
and their degrees of transparency, and encouraging them to
work as closely together as possible - all of that builds on the
strengths of this system.
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Governor, in August the Bank made the biggest cut to its GDP
forecast in any Inflation Report previously.  This time it's the
biggest rise to the GDP forecast in any previous Inflation
Report.  You're looking at me quizzically -
Ben Broadbent:
You're not comparing like with like.  You're talking about the
cut to GDP in August over a three-year period.  We haven't
changed -
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Actually, I was talking about 2017, for what it's worth.  But
my question is more generalities -
Ben Broadbent:
It's not true that it was the biggest cut -
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Okay.  It was big, though.  These are big changes to the
forecast.  Surely we can agree on that.  And my question is
just a more general one.  Do you feel that big changes for
forecasts, do they reasonably undermine the credibility of an
institution like the Bank of England?  Should we care or are
people getting a little bit over enervated by changes like that?
Mark Carney:
I think the first thing is that there was a big change, and
there will be big changes as a consequence of the decision of
the British people to leave the European Union.  And it has
short term implications over the next three years, we think,
for the path of growth.  That is not to make a judgement
about the medium term, longer term implications and the
benefits to prosperity that can come from resetting our
relationship with Europe and building new relationships
abroad.  And we only are making the judgement over the
forecast horizon.
We have taken - in August we did take a big judgement in
terms of the implications.  Broad brush, where this economy
ends up two and a half, three years from now.  We think
that's right.  That's what this forecast says; we end up
basically in the same place as the economy.  After a
substantial stimulus package from the Bank of England and
from stimulus from a fairly sharp depreciation in the currency.
So broad brush, that's there.
In terms of the near-term momentum in the economy, it has
been higher.  That's absolutely welcome.  Long may it last.
But we do see, even in the short term, some deceleration,
and a deceleration into 2017.  And we've explained the
dynamics of why we see that.
So, should people care about the forecast?  I mean obviously
those who watch the Bank closely, yes, they should care
about the forecast.  It's entirely right that we're challenged
on what we got wrong and accept what we got right.  And
why - I think the most important is why.  Because that tells
us about how the economy is functioning.
And if I can just end with this - Ben, you may want to
supplement, but just to end is that - it tells us that
consumers are being more adaptive, because what they see
is a job market that's still pretty strong, their wages are
growing at the same rate, credit's cheap, it's competitive, it's
available.  Makes sense; entirely rational.
Financial markets have pulled forward a lot of the
adjustment, particularly in the currency market, but also in
equity.  And businesses are somewhere in between.  And we
have a fair bit of intelligence of why businesses are
somewhere in between, in terms of their preparations but
also their degree of uncertainty about where this may end up,
because - as I've said a few times - it hasn't yet begun and
there are quite a range of outcomes that could potentially be
there.  But, Ben -
Ben Broadbent:
No, I mean I might talk in a moment just about the near-
term forecast and how that evolved and the distinction
between forecasting the very near term further out.  All
forecasts change as new information comes in, indeed every
time the price of an asset changes someone's forecast
changes, or if you like the previous forecast was wrong
because asset prices embody expectations of the future.  So,
these things always change over time.
Now in August, as always, we based the very near-term
forecast - and we do them in a slightly different way than
those further out.  So, the medium-term forecast - and this is
true of any economic forecast - are based more on economic
models, judgements about the forces - underlying forces
hitting the economy.  In the very near term, you rely
relatively more on statistical models that link
contemporaneous survey measures of output with what
official estimates are.  And as you know in July those all fell
precipitously.
And we were aware that when you get a big event like this,
the surveys themselves can be very volatile and their
relationship with official estimates of output can also be less
reliable.  So, we aimed off those very significantly for our
best guess at what third quarter growth would be.  And
indeed, as it happened we aimed off by more than most other
forecasters.  So, most forecasters, and therefore the average
of forecasts, was for a contraction in output in the third
quarter which we did not expect.
In the event the surveys were volatile, they did bounce back.
And not only that, but the official estimates of growth for the
third quarter were higher even than the new higher surveys
indicated.
But as the Governor said, the important thing I think is to
learn, not only about those relationships - you know, do we
have new estimates now for those relationships between
surveys and growth? - But also more importantly what the
news about growth tells us about the medium term.  And that
is the judgement that we've been trying to make in this
Inflation Report.
Ben Chu, The Independent:
You say that the framework, the way the Government works
with the Bank of England doesn't need to change, but what
about the political discourse about the way the Bank does
what it does?  You've had William Hague a very senior former
member of the Government, saying that central bankers,
presumably you included, have lost the plot.  You've had
some very personal attacks on you as Governor from senior
Tory MPs - or some Tory MPs.  Is all that fair comment?  In a
democracy, people are entitled to their opinion, entitled to
say that thing.  Or does that kind of sniping itself undermine
the independence of the Central Bank and would you say a
period of silence on the part of your critics would be
welcome?
Mark Carney:
It’s a trap.  In a democracy obviously people express their
opinion and there’s always going to be a wide range of
opinions and what’s important is that the MPC recognises
both its responsibilities and the limits of our responsibilities.
That we clearly explain our actions and we’re held to account
for these actions.   I don’t think it’s that much more
complicated than that, and we have a variety of mechanisms
in order to do that and this event, the Inflation Report,
releasing the minutes at exactly the same time so everyone
has all the information, answering  these questions and then
go in a few weeks to testify in front of the TSC, that's all part
of that accountability mechanism.  And having a robust set of
questions and challenges about the forecast, the stance of
policy, is it right, all in the pursuit of not just getting inflation
to 2%, but getting it there, keeping it there - but getting in
there in the right way.  And recognising, I think, as part - and
one thing we would like to have come out of these debates
and these sessions is - we are in exceptional circumstances.
I think it's partly stating the obvious, but under our remit in
exceptional circumstances when we have - we are compelled
by Parliament to look at the trade-off between inflation, the
speed with which we get inflation back to target and the
impact on activity and jobs.
And there are limits to how far we can move that trade-off
and those limits are a function of what's causing inflation to
move, what real effects are there in the economy, where
inflation expectations are, how much slack there is in the
economy and how responsibly can we balance it.  And so we
want to have that debate about both the scale of the trade-off
and how we are managing it because that improves
understandings and outcomes.  So, that can be as vigorous
as people want.  That is the plot by the way.
Jill Ward, Bloomberg News:
Governor, how far and how fast would the pound have to fall
to make you worried and would you rule out currency
intervention in that sort of situation?  Thanks.
Mark Carney:
We don't target the exchange rate, we target inflation, we
target getting inflation back to target in the manner I just
responded.  That's not to say that we're indifferent to the
exchange rate, you know it's an important relative price, it
has impacts on inflation, but we care about why it moves and
what - and the combination of the exchange rate, other
factors that are driving the economy and inflation in order to
determine the stance of monetary policy to achieve that
inflation target.
Simon Vigar, 5 News:
Okay forecasts are forecasts, but a lot of people are going to
be worried by the inflation forecast.  What's your message to
people who are just about making ends meet right now?
Mark Carney:
Well, look we expect inflation to go up and we expect inflation
to go up and to be a bit above 2% over the balance of the
next couple of years.  That puts us into a positon of making a
challenging judgement about how quickly we bring that
inflation back to target at a time when the economy is
undergoing - or just starting to undergo a pretty big
transition.  And our judgement is that we have the right
degree of monetary stimulus for the economy to ensure that
during this period where inflation is a little higher, more
people are in work, fewer people lose their jobs - the same
thing said differently - and that wage growth is as strong as it
could be in those circumstances.
And let's also remember though what this forecast says,
which is that growth of 1.4% next year, picking up to 1.5,
1.6% in the subsequent two years, so there's growth.  It's
not as robust as it has been, but this is a forecast with
growth, with some increase in unemployment but relative to
other challenging times, a quite modest level of
unemployment.  And it is a forecast that also sees by the end
wage growth going up to just around 4%.  So, this isn't -
there's a difficult period here, but I think it does need to be
put into context.
Jason Douglas, Wall St Journal:
Can I just come back to this issue of uncertainty, you've
talked about it quite a bit already this morning, but one of the
judgement in the Inflation Report is that the MPC assumes
uncertainty actually rises somewhat less than they did in
August and that in turn feeds through into your projections
for business investment and so on.  What is it - it's not
obviously necessarily what is less uncertain about the UK's
future ties to the EU than it was in the summer, so what is it
that has changed, or is it perhaps that you think people are
less sensitive to uncertainty than you maybe thought before?
Mark Carney:
I'll do the first bit and then Ben can supplement.  What we've
seen with consumers is that there hasn't been a bit
uncertainty effect.  I mean it's almost discernible by its
absence.  And so we're not assuming that that reasserts
itself, that's the first point.
In terms of business, broad brush, yes the uncertainty effect
has been there.  It's hard obviously to have real time and we
don't have real time estimates of business investment and
the actual hard data on investment is notoriously prone to
revision.  But in terms of surveys and our company visits,
what we see is that up to around half of UK companies are
taking into account the uncertainty about the future
relationship with Europe and it's having some influence on
their investment - some influence on their investment.
What we see in terms of the - so it's more about the mapping
of a level of uncertainty to the decisions that households and
businesses are taking where we've made adjustment.  There
is some adjustment to the profile of uncertainty, Ben, but I
wouldn't hang on that.
Ben Broadbent:
I don't think it's true that we've lowered it; we've changed
slightly the profile and we have less of a spike and then fall
away in the near term which characterised the profile in
August.  And actually in this Report we think it persists for a
little longer and we've learnt something about the timetabling
of Article 50 in that respect.  So, I wouldn’t describe it as a
lower profile throughout the forecast, just the shape of it is
slightly different, but actually further out it's a little higher
and that's one of the things contributing to weaker
investment growth.
Tim Wallace, Daily Telegraph:
Governor, given your letter on Monday that you wrote to the
Chancellor, if Britain hasn't left the EU by the middle of 2019
for whatever reason would you still consider staying on for
longer as Governor to see that process out?
Mark Carney:
I mean, I'll just refer back to my answer to Geoff, I think
we've had enough of that saga.  And you know, the
government has indicated that they're going to appeal this
ruling, the Prime Minister's statement this morning - or the
government statement that the judicial process is not
inconsistent with the Article 50 by the end of March.  I would
put this into the camp - I wouldn't bring it back to the
economics - of there are going to be a series of events
through this process of triggering Article 50, the negotiations
during the Article 50 process and potentially a transition
process beyond, there will be a series of events which will
feedback into uncertainty.
And to go to the profile of uncertainty in the forecast, I think
one thing is we, on reflection, have realised that we expect
that - not a sort of spike around - I mean yes a spike around
the actual triggering and the initial start of this, but that the
level of uncertainty probably doesn't tail away as quickly over
that period because in any negotiation, you know, often
everything doesn't come together until relatively late in the
process and that's a natural process, particularly for
something as complex as this.
So, those effects will be there in the economy and what
monetary policy is trying to do is to offset, lean against some
of those effects and support the economy during that period
of time.
Helia Ibrahimi, Channel 4 News:
Governor, you said that the court ruling today was an
example of the uncertainty of the Brexit process, but how do
you make policy in such circumstances?  And even if you put
your own position and we draw a line under it, is the politics
of Brexit too difficult for the Bank to manoeuvre and is it just
going to get worse from here on in?
Mark Carney:
No, I mean the people of the United Kingdom have voted to
leave the European Union.  That is the policy of the
government.  There is a process that has just started in order
for that to be fulfilled.  There will be a lot of uncertainty and
volatility throughout that process.  Then we come in.
We take into account that prospective - actual and
prospective uncertainty and how it’s likely to affect
businesses and housing market and consumers, British
households, and then try to calibrate policy against that.  I
would say that since June - even in the run up to June 23rd
we were a bit informed, we learnt a bit about how people
reacted.  In the subsequent six months, we’ve learnt more
and some of the refinements in this projection reflect that.
The difference between consumers and businesses is a little
more marked.  And so we set policy.
We don’t have the luxury of stepping back and ignoring these
effects; we have to make decisions.  We made a decision
today that the stance of policy was right and we made a
decision today to let the contingent guidance expire.  I might
just note sort of parenthetically that that guidance worked
because it was contingent, people understood the
contingency both in markets and yourselves in terms of how
you wrote about it.  And as you saw, the economy performed
better than our forecast.  That guidance felt the way so it’s
not a big surprise that it expired but it still was a decision for
the MPC to take.
So, we can deal with it, but we’ll be transparent as possible
about what our assumptions are, how it’s mapping to the
economy and then the accountability after the fact to say -
okay, what happened in intervening periods between
forecasts, what turned out broadly as we expected, what
didn’t and where do we go from here?
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:
Governor, on that guidance that has now expired, given it has
expired are you able to say whether the next move in interest
rate is more likely to be up or down?
Mark Carney:
Well it was hopefully about as clear as it could be that you
can envisage scenarios where it goes either way.  We don’t
have a bias in terms of direction of where the next move will
be.  Again, we’re in a period of a fair bit of uncertainty.  You
can envision scenarios where either direction would be
merited.  And where we’re going to be anchored is around the
inflation target and making sure that we get that trade off
right.
What should be clear is that we think unanimously as the MPC
that the current stance of policy is right, and it’s right for the
economy - even an economy that’s facing the headwinds that
come from uncertainty.
Holly Williams, Press Association: How much of the growth upgrades would you say are down to
the Bank's actions in August?
And secondly, would you say that you feel under political
pressure when making monetary policy decisions after
Theresa May's bad side effects comments?
Mark Carney:
I’ll answer the second bit and I’ll let Ben answer the first bit.
No, we don’t feel under any pressure from the government,
certainly none from the Prime Minister.  I think the Prime
Minister fully supports and the government fully supports the
monetary policy framework we have in place, and in that
framework, we take those decisions.  How rapidly those
decisions flow through to activity, you get some influence, but
it really builds with time.  So we wouldn’t say that, the short-
term revision is the gift of Dr Broadbent.
Ben Broadbent:
No, I think that’s right.  I mean the peak effect of policy on
output might be three, four quarters.  It is true that some
interest rates moved by a little more than we’d expected after
the policy package was announced and those will have had
some impact on retail interest rates, and one hopes consumer
sentiment as well which is part of the way they work.  But
most of the effect of these things comes through over longer
periods of time than that.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk News: Following your meeting with the Chancellor and did it in any
way colour the MPC's decisions or guidelines today and should
the government come through at the Autumn Statement and
beyond in supporting growth?  Is there a chance that some of
the action that you took back in August as the emergency
measure will be curtailed early, i.e. QE?  Is there a chance
that might be tapered earlier than usual?
Mark Carney:
Sorry, I'm not sure which meeting with the Chancellor to
which you’re referring, but I can answer it in general which is
that I meet with the Chancellor relatively frequently and
obviously we discuss the economic outlook and for
understanding the stance of actual policy we’ll respond to
fiscal policy if we need to when it changes.  We take the
current fiscal policy as given and that’s what's in the forecast
so there's nothing to be read into the forecast about the
potential future stance of fiscal policy in the country, that will
be revealed in due course.
And sorry the second part of the …?
Harry Daniels, Live squawk News: About previous measures like QE?
Mark Carney:
I mean, we have to decide the stance of policy at each
meeting.  In general, one has an asset purchase programme
and that decision tends to flow through to its fruition.
Minouche probably - why don’t you say a word about where
we are in terms of the purchases just to provide some detail?
Minouche Shafik:
Yes, I mean along with the information you got today there
was a market notice which explained our plans for the
remainder of the QE programme.  We’ve purchased £30bn;
we also purchased an additional £12bn because we had a
reinvestment to maintain the stock.  Our intention based on
the MPC's decision is to continue to complete that purchase
with another £30bn over the next few months.  We also have
one more reinvestment which we’ll announce in February.
So the plan is to continue to implement the current decision
and the stock will be £435bn going forward until the MPC
decides otherwise.
Gemma Tetlow, Financial Times:
You've been very clear that you haven’t changed your view
about the long-term impact of Brexit on the UK economy, but
we’ve continued to see consumers carrying on spending over
the last few months.  You politely refer to this as adaptive
behaviour but isn’t what you’re really saying that consumers
are being rather short-sighted and a bit stupid not realising
quite how difficult things are going to get for them next year
and beyond?
Mark Carney:
Not at all, not at all.  Consumers - they have jobs, they're
being paid, they're consuming out of income and this isn't
you know debt fuelled consumption and making hay while the
sun shines.  So, this is rational - rational behaviour.
What we see is - what we're drawing attention to is the
difference between the views of financial markets, in
particular the foreign exchange market and the underlying
demand in the economy.  And that helps set up a more
challenging trade-off because the scale of the exchange rate
move, the speed and persistence of pass through is what
causes inflation to be above target at the forecast horizon, or
at the policy horizon to be more specific.  And so we have to
make a judgement about what to do about that.
Charlotte Lomas, Sky News:
I just want to ask - a lot of people look to the Bank to make
decisions on the way they spend or their mortgage decisions.
In light that you got so many of your forecasts wrong three
months ago, do you think that this then undermines the
credibility of the Bank, or undermines the trust that people
should have in you when they look to the Bank to make those
decisions?
Mark Carney:
Well, in terms of the forecast, in the near term we have more
momentum in the economy and growth is going to be
stronger by the end of the year.  That's welcome news and
we explained the reasons behind that.  In terms of the
horizon over which to make a mortgage decision, to buy a
house, we see the economy ending up in exactly the same
place today.  So, you know - and in terms of the positon that
households are in, if they were to make a decision to
purchase a property, borrowing costs are cheaper.  And
borrowing costs are cheaper because we think we need that
in an environment of uncertainty and other factors that are
weighing down on activity so that more people are in work
and that nominal wages are higher, all things being equal, to
support activity.  So, no we don't - I think that enhances
credibility.
Jenny Scott:
Is there anyone who hasn't had a question yet who would like
one before I go around again.  Phil's looking hopeful.
Mark Carney:
I was going to say is there anyone who is not Phil Aldrick who
has a question.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
NIESER this week said that inflation could hit 4% by the end
of next year, yeah the end of next year, and you've talked
about - there are limits to the amount of inflation you'll
tolerate, so I just wondered if 4% would be tolerable, or if
you have any idea of what level of tolerance you would have?
Mark Carney:
Well, it's not going to surprise you that we're not going to
give a point figure to that question, but it does allow us to
kind of underscore that the limit, if you will, is a product -
there's no one limit it's a product of what's actually causing
the overshoot.  So, a world in which future supply is going to
be lower and real incomes have to adjust and the
combination of that plus what it does to the exchange rate
relative to demand, leads to an overshoot is one in which we
are clearly willing to tolerate some overshoot of inflation at
the policy horizon.  Because we're making a decision about
how to take that real income adjustment whether it's through
higher inflation or lower nominal wages and higher
unemployment.  And clearly we're within the limit right now
because we are providing stimulus by maintaining the August
package.  But Ben, do you - ?
Ben Broadbent:
No, I don't think.  So, I think some forecasters I should say,
with respect to that particularly forecast, seem to have
estimated that the exchange rate effect will come through
somewhat faster than we think.  And for the same reason
actually many forecasters have inflation falling away faster
than we do, which would make it ironically less relevant for
policy actually.  If it passes through very quickly, there's not
much that policy can do about it either way.
But as the Governor said, you really have to understand why
we're getting this overshoot, what else is going on, and that's
what governs this trade-off we are asked to make.  So there
is no single number to define that limit.
Jenny Scott:
Okay, I think if anyone who hasn't asked a question doesn't
have one then I think we're done.  Thanks very much.
