MONETARY POLICY REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE
Thursday 3 November 2022
Opening Remarks by Andrew Bailey, Governor
Introduction
Welcome to the November Monetary Policy Report press conference.
Today, we have increased Bank Rate by 0.75 percentage points to 3%.  This is the
eighth consecutive increase in Bank Rate since December last year. We have raised
rates by a total of 2.9 percentage points.
These are big changes.  They have a real impact on people’s lives.  So why are we
doing it?  And why are we doing it now when so many people are already struggling
with higher energy and food prices, and other bills?
We are increasing Bank Rate because inflation is too high.  And it is the Bank’s job
to bring it down.
For years, inflation had been low and stable.  Most people did not have to worry
about inflation.  But that has changed with supply chain problems after the
pandemic, the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and the shrinkage of the UK labour
force.  Consumer price inflation stands at over 10%.  But I know that for many it will
feel worse, because the prices of essentials like energy and groceries have risen by
much more.
People should not have to worry about inflation as they go about their daily business.
That is why we have been raising interest rates and did so again today.  Low and
stable inflation is the bedrock of a stable economy, a predictable economy in which
people can go about their lives and plan for their futures with confidence;  an
economy in which hard-earned money keeps its value.  If we do not act forcefully
now, it will be worse later on.
As the forecast we are publishing today shows, the road ahead will be a tough one.
The sharp increase in energy prices, caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, has
made us poorer as a nation.  The level of economic activity in our economy is likely
to be flat, and even fall, for some time.
But the economy will recover. And inflation will fall.  We cannot pretend to know what
will happen to gas prices.  That depends on the war in Ukraine.  But from where we
stand now, we think inflation will begin to fall back from the middle of next year,
probably quite sharply.
To make sure that happens, Bank Rate may have to go up further over the coming
months.
We can make no promises about future interest rates.  But based on where we stand
today, we think Bank Rate will have to go up by less than currently priced into
financial markets.  That is important because, for instance, it means that the rates on
new fixed-term mortgages should not need to rise as they have done.
Let me make some additional important points.
Conditioning assumptions
There has been significant volatility in UK financial markets since our last Monetary
Policy Report in August.
The lines in this chart show you the peak level of interest rates expected in financial
markets in various economies, and how those expectations have moved around
since our last forecast. The expectations for Bank Rate here in the UK are plotted in
turquoise.
At the time of the August Report, the market-implied path for Bank Rate rose to a
peak of about 3% in March 2023.  By the Committee’s September policy
announcement, on 22 September, the peak was 5%, one year ahead.  On 27
September, when turmoil in the market was most intense, the path reached its
highest peak, at nearly 6.5% in November 2023.  At the market close yesterday, it
stood at about 4.75%.
Given these moves, we have conditioned our November forecast on an average of
the market-implied paths over the final 7 days of our usual 15-day window.  This
means that the forecast we present today is conditioned on a path for Bank Rate that
rises to a peak of 5.25% in the second quarter of next year.  Despite the shorter
window, this is substantially higher than in August.
Part of this repricing in UK interest rates reflects global developments.  But as this
next chart illustrates, there has clearly been a UK-specific component.
Indeed, these significant moves in UK yields – and in UK financial conditions more
broadly – have occurred in parallel with significant developments in fiscal policy.
As we describe in a Box in the Monetary Policy Report, the Government has
announced an Energy Price Guarantee and an Energy Bill Relief Scheme.  These
schemes provide support to households and businesses with their energy bills.
The full Energy Price Guarantee will now last for six months.  Details are yet to follow
on the level of support provided beyond that period.  The MPC has therefore
adopted a stylised indicative path for household energy prices in producing the
forecast.  The working assumption is that the typical household energy bill is halfway
between the announced £2,500 limit under the EPG and the level implied by futures
prices under the Ofgem price cap.
The energy support policies are likely to limit significantly further increases in
inflation, and reduce its volatility, while also supporting spending relative to the
August projections.  Other fiscal measures announced as of 17 October also support
demand relative to the August projection.
The November forecast does not incorporate any fiscal measures that may be
announced at the Autumn Statement scheduled for 17 November.
Sadly, as a consequence of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, I talked at length about
wholesale gas prices at both the May and August press conferences.
Wholesale gas prices continue to be exceptionally volatile.  Spot prices have fallen
recently (as you can see from the turquoise line).  But medium-term futures prices
have been driven higher by Russia’s restriction of gas supplies to Europe and
concerns about gas storage capacity beyond this winter (as you can see by
comparing the orange line for November with the purple line for August).
The Committee has conditioned its November forecast on the full futures curve for
wholesale energy and non-energy commodity prices.  This is a change to its
previous convention that wholesale energy prices follow their respective curves for
the first six months of the projection only and then remain constant.  This is a
pragmatic choice.  The new conditioning assumption avoids a purely mechanical
jump in the projection for consumer prices, which would be a product of using the
former convention beyond the assumed two-year duration of Government support to
retail energy prices.
The economic outlook
By comparison with the moves in financial markets, the news in the economic data
has been more modest.  Gross Domestic Product has been weaker than we
expected, labour market data have been stronger, and inflation numbers – while high
– have come in about as we expected in August.
We keep a particularly close eye on the labour market.  There are some signs that
labour demand is starting to soften.  But the labour market remains tight.  The
unemployment rate fell to 3.5% in the three months to August, its lowest level since
1974.
As you can see in the purple bars on this chart, the number of unemployed people
has now fallen below its pre-Covid level.
A key reason why the labour market has tightened since the pandemic is a marked
increase in the number of people who are without a job and who are not actively
seeking one.  The number of such so-called inactive people has risen again since
the August report (as you can see in the blue bars), and by more than projected.
Sadly, many of the people who are outside the labour market report that they suffer
from long-term sickness.
The forecast
Looking further ahead, the MPC expects domestic inflationary pressures to remain
strong over the next year.  But in its central projection, which is conditioned on the
market-implied path for Bank Rate that rises to 5.25%, inflation then falls sharply.  It
reaches 1.4% at the end of second year, below the 2% target, and it falls to 0% at
the end of the third year.
Contributing to this fall is the purely arithmetic fact that the previous rises in energy
prices drop out of the calculations of the annual inflation rate.  But, in addition, tighter
financial conditions and the squeeze on real incomes slow demand and eventually
lead to excess supply and rising unemployment.  This downturn in the economy
dampens domestic inflationary pressures.
In the Committee’s best collective judgement, GDP will continue to fall throughout
2023 and into 2024.  Compared with previous UK recessions, GDP remains weak
relative to its pre-recession level for a prolonged period (as you see here in yellow).
There is more to this story, however.  The Committee will not pursue a path that we
think will drive inflation far below target.  The MPC does not follow the market; it sets
the level of Bank Rate to return inflation to the 2% target sustainably, and in a way
that avoids undesirable volatility in output.
In every Monetary Policy Report, we also publish a projection conditional on a
constant level of Bank Rate, though, for the avoidance of any doubt, with the clear
warning that this does not mean the Committee expects to keep Bank Rate constant
either.
That said, comparing outcomes under this alternative conditioning assumption with
outcomes in the central projection gives a sense of how different policy decisions
may shape the paths for economic activity and inflation.
As you can see here in the dashed yellow line, in projections conditioned on a
constant level of Bank Rate at 3%, the depth of the recession is much shallower.
Not surprisingly, the projected outcomes for inflation are also different.  Conditional
on a constant rate, consumer price inflation is projected to be a little above – rather
than below – the target at the end of the second year.
And let me add a further point before I conclude.  Regardless of the path for Bank
Rate, the MPC judges that the risk to its inflation projections are skewed to the
upside.  In part, the skew reflects the possibility of more persistence in wage and
price-setting.
This upside skew has important implications for monetary policy.  If I can put this
simply, yes we project a steep fall in inflation, but there are substantial upside risks
to that path.
The monetary policy decision
It is not least for this reason that the majority of the Committee judges that further
increases in Bank Rate may be required to return inflation sustainably to target,
should the economy evolve broadly in line with the forecast presented in the
November Monetary Policy Report.
But the central projections, conditional on the market-implied path for Bank Rate,
serve as a reminder that we should not increase Bank Rate too far.  The MPC
judges that the path for Bank Rate required to return inflation sustainably to target is
shallower than that priced into financial markets.
There are, however, considerable uncertainties around the outlook.  If the outlook
suggests more persistent inflation pressures, the Committee will respond forcefully,
as necessary.
With that, Ben, Dave and I will be happy to take your questions.
