Bank of England
Inflation Report Q&A
5th November 2015
Richard Edgar, ITV News:
Governor, not an awful lot has changed in the numbers that
you base your forecast on from the August Report to today,
and yet the forecast - the market expectations of when
interest rates will rise that you base some of your forecast on
- have moved nine months further back.  Can you explain
that move, please?
Mark Carney:
Yes, well there's a few things that have changed and your
question allows me to draw them out more clearly.  First, with
respect to what's happened in markets - and I should make it
absolutely clear (I know you know this, Richard, but just for
everybody) that what we use to condition our forecast is the
15-day moving average of market prices and we fix that at a
point which was Thursday of last week, I believe - right?
Wednesday of last week.
There's been some subsequent moves in markets; we don't
do a real time update.  So first thing is we use that historic
look-back.  And over that period, at least the average over
that period showed, as you suggest, quite notable falls in
risk-free assets and an implied move-out in the date when
interest rates would begin to rise in the UK.
But there also had been quite sharp sell-offs in risky assets.
Bank funding spreads had gone up notably, credit spreads
had gone up, equity markets had sold off quite significantly.
There's been a big unwind of some of those moves in the last
few days.  But the point being that first, from a financial
conditions perspective as a whole, it wasn't unalloyed good
news; in other words it just wasn't the improvement or the
lowering of the yield curve which of course is, all things equal
stimulative, there was actually a lot taken away from changes
in the risky asset prices.  So that's one element that had
changed.  And both of those was the opposing forces I
referred to in my initial remarks.
The second thing that has changed since August is the
outlook for global growth, our outlook for global growth,
particularly for emerging markets.  Now there's been a lot of
news in terms of actual performance in emerging markets, as
you're aware, but we also used this last three months to take
an assessment of the medium-term prospects for emerging
economies.  The net result of that, even though emerging
economies aren't that big a proportion of demand for UK
goods, is a mark-down on level terms for UK-weighted global
growth of about three quarters of a percentage point two
years out.  So it's a notable drag.
It's almost exclusively because of emerging markets; it flows
through a bit through the advanced economies, but again, as
I referenced in my opening remarks and as you see in the
Report, our view is pretty constructive on the outlook for our
major advanced trading partners.  So you have those two
aspects.
The third aspect I'll draw attention to - and I won't go into
detail, subject to subsequent questions, is we've refined our
estimates of pass-through from exchange rates both into
import prices and, as they flow through, into final consumer
prices.  And so you have an element of the persistence there.
Now that, wrapped it all together, had a consequence not just
for the forecast, but also for how we think about the optimal
trade-off of bringing inflation back to target.
Robert Peston, BBC:
Governor, in the last few months you've repeatedly said that
the decision to raise interest rates would come into sharper
relief at the turn of the year.  It's patently not going to come
into sharper relief at the turn of the year.  Do you regret
saying that?
Mark Carney:
Thank you, Robert.  Absolutely not.  I have No regrets.  First
thing - let me just preface.  Obviously, we speak at these
press conferences, as you know - you've been coming to
them for a long time - we speak on behalf of the Committee,
so not individual views.  Second, sort of obvious point, is that
the year has not yet turned, and the third point, which is
obvious as well and you know this well, is that I'm speaking
about a decision, not pre-judging what that decision would
be.
The question was how much progress would be made in the
economy in the intervening months.  You can call that data
dependence, but it's a question of how much progress is
made.
There have been some notable events in intervening months,
including developments in emerging economies.  I would say
progress in terms of the prospects of normalisation has been
mixed, but if you look at growth - growth has ticked down to
growing around trend in the most recent quarter - at least in
the first estimate of the most recent quarter.  We do expect,
even in the face of fiscal consolidation and global weakness
growth to reaccelerate or pick back up from that into next
year - we'll see what happens there.
Core inflation's been a bit softer than we would have
expected, all things being equal in August.  Part of that could
be the greater persistence from exchange rates and the pass-
through - again, we'll see how that evolves.
Importantly, domestic costs have evolved largely in line with
our expectations - the combination of wage growth and
productivity - largely in line, including issues such as the
compositional effects Ben spoke about at this last press
conference.
So as a whole, we have a situation where, as I say, there is
mixed progress, but there is progress towards - and we're in
a situation where - and I'll repeat myself from my opening
comments - where we have resilient domestic demand; we
have quite robust private domestic demand; and in the face
of global weakness, we still see the need for limited and
gradual increases in interest rates to bring inflation back to
target and - an important point I'd underscore is - the point is
not just bringing it back to target and then shooting through
it, it's bringing it back to target and keeping it there.  So
bringing it back to target in a sustainable fashion.
So we will have to craft policy as a Committee in order to
achieve that, recognising that we have some foreign effects
that are dampening inflation, including out to around two
years.  But they will ultimately dissipate and then we'll be left
with the domestic factors dominating, all things being equal,
and we need to manage that appropriately.
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News: You've alluded to, in your introductory statement and also in
your letter to George Osborne today, that the MPC is now
going to try and return inflation back to target around - in
two years' time, rather than within two years' time.  What's
the purpose behind that change of language?  Is it some kind
of increased flexibility?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, thanks, Scott.  As you know, and it was made clear in
our remit letter of two and a half years ago and then
subsequently reaffirmed, this emphasis on the flexibility we
have over the time horizon for the inflation target, and it's
the responsibility of the Committee, to be clear, to take
assessment of the types of shocks that are hitting the
economy, affecting inflation, and what's the optimal time
horizon to return.
When we first had the big move in global commodity prices,
the assessment was largely based on so-called base effects.
You had, you know, one-time fall in food and energy prices.
Those would wash out through CPI in roughly a year, and you
could look through those and bring inflation back in a timeline
consistent with the peak impact of monetary policy - so
something in the 18 - 24 months type horizon.
And that's how we've been thinking about things, and broadly
that's been the stance.  As we've looked a little more closely
about the persistence of some of the foreign disinflation that
we're having, so the time over which pass-through is coming
through and affecting the inflation target.  Another example
would be recent moves in energy prices; I'm not talking
about oil, but if you look at gas futures curves, that deck has
fallen out through two years - you can see the flow-through
to utility prices that will weigh on CPI inflation.  But it's also
an effect that will ultimately come off as well.  It's a price
level adjustment, but one that happens over the course of a
few years.
So taking all of that into account, and recognising, as I said
to Robert, the pick-up in domestic costs that would be
necessary to offset it, there's a desire to ensure that we
return sustainably to target; so not try to fully offset those
persistent effects to return too quickly to target, which would
imply looser policy, all things being equal; but to ensure that
policy is consistent, and consistent with inflation being at
target once those effects dissipate.  And that brings the shift
which is a subtle, but notable, shift from within to around two
years.
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Governor, five years ago in the Inflation Report, markets
were expecting rates to be about 3.75% now.  About a year
ago the Inflation Report was - looking at market forecasts -
saying that the rate was going to be about 1% now, little bit
below 1%.  All the time the markets have been forecasting
that rates are going to be going up at some point about a
year hence or a little bit more.  Do you - are you really sure
this time around that it's even worth endorsing those
forecasts, given how many times they've been wrong in the
past?
And also - sorry, I know I shouldn't ask two questions -
Mark Carney:
I'll just make sure I understand your first question.  I just
missed the last bit because of the camera - sorry.
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Is it worth even endorsing, or not endorsing - commenting on
at all - forecasts which have proven themselves to be wrong
repeatedly throughout the past five years, in terms of market
yield curves?
And secondly, at what stage do we look at what's happened
here - and each year rates have remained flat, despite what
has been forecast - and say, there seems to be something
chronic here?  Or is it just a series of unfortunate events?
Mark Carney:
Yeah.  Well the first thing - we're not endorsing a market
view, as you know, Ed.  We take mechanically a constellation
of market prices and we use them as assumptions in our
forecast.  What you get in this forecast in doing so is an
overshoot of inflation at Year 2, a little higher overshoot at
Year 3.  And, as I've been noting, that's not the preference of
the Committee.  The preference of the Committee is to bring
inflation back to target and to keep it there.
The bigger question - and I'll pass to Ben to supplement on
this - the bigger question, which is the right question, which
is - what has been happening and what is the learning
process about the nature of the global economy, where
equilibrium interest rates are - in other words, how much
stimulus has been provided even though - I mean, people
talk.  Not you, but sometimes - in fact no one in this room
does it - but people talk about, quote, exceptionally
stimulative monetary policy in the past, just because interest
rates are at historic lows, ignoring that the level of interest
rates required to actually provide stimulus have collapsed -
certainly post-crisis, and in fact were likely very negative
during the period where this institution, before my time, was
engaged in quantitative easing.
We're at a stage, though, where we do think that those
equilibrium interest rates have been rising, that they've likely
turned positive, that policy is stimulative, is net stimulative,
even in the event of a much slower global economy.
And I will now pass to Ben, but one point I would say as well,
that's changed, and the assessment of the potential growth of
both the advanced and now the emerging economies has
changed, and that's something you do see - the latter is
something you see in this forecast.
Ben Broadbent:
The Governor's said a lot of what I was going to say, and it is
a question of this neutral or equilibrium interest rate. The
only thing additional I'd say is that that had been declining for
many years - many, many years prior to the crisis.  A lot of
the reason why even at zero interest rates - close to zero
interest rates - policy has not been - or was not for some
years after the crisis - acccommodative.  Some of those
factors were obviously to do with the crisis itself, and had
depressed that neutral rate.  But for a long time, I would say
- as much as 15 years before it, the evidence suggests that
neutral rate was falling.  And you need only look at real
interest rates - yields on indexed bonds - to see that, which
declined steadily and significantly all the way through the
early nineties, right up to the middle of the last decade.
And there are deep forces, global forces, that probably were
at work here, including demographics - something my
predecessor, Charlie Bean referred to in a recent speech,
which I recommend you read - stuff to do with the nature of
investment demand, the nature of growth in China.
So the only point I'd want to emphasise at the end is that,
you know, the level of official interest rates at any point in
time is therefore not some arbitrary choice of the Central
Bank.  In a way, we're responding to these forces.  To the
extent they're to do with the crisis, one would expect them to
wane a little over time.  And as the Governor has just said,
that's implicitly true in our forecast, I think, to some degree.
Catherine Boyle, CNBC:
Janet Yellen has obviously just said, as I'm sure you know,
that there's still a live possibility that the Fed may move in
December.  Could you still say this about the first half of
2016?
Mark Carney:
That the Fed could move in the first half of 2016?  No, look,
we take a decision each - we've just taken a decision.  In the
view of the majority of the Committee it didn't make sense at
this point to tighten monetary policy.  One member did think
it made sense.  We'll take a decision each month and it will
depend on the path.
I think your perspective on the likelihood of that is obviously
informed by the forecast that we've given.  I would
underscore that the forecast takes into account a
constellation of asset price moves - so not just the yield
curve, but where other asset prices had gone and the impact
of that.  It obviously updates our perspective - and others
may disagree with that perspective - but our perspective on
global growth and the flow-through, and it should be seen in
the context of the MPC's objective, in terms of the time
horizon, to return inflation to target, and its intention to
return it there in a sustainable fashion.  In other words, to
return it there and to keep it there.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:
Governor, the forecasts you've got suggests that inflation has
a very low probability - 55% or so - of exceeding the 2%
target over the next three years, unless if you keep interest
rates on hold all the way through 2016.  And yet we've got
house prices this morning rising by 9.7% on the Halifax
index; unsecured credit rising at over 8%.  Are we now at a
situation where you might have to think of macropru
measures to keep some other aspects in check while you still
need very low interest rates?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, okay.  Very important question.  Just one point of
context, if I may, Chris, first - and then get to the heart of it -
which is that, I think at three years, which is roughly what
you're referencing, we have a - I think it's a 56%, for what
it's worth, probability for the extent the ribbon chart is
accurate - of inflation overshooting that far out, again, given
the overall context, including asset prices, of global growth.
You know, for what it's worth, that overshoot - and an
overshoot of 2.2 - that's the highest overshoot we've had
since August 2005 in terms of our forecast.  The overshoot at
Year 2 is the biggest we've had since February of 2013, a
time when inflation was above and coming down.  You know,
and again I will re-emphasise what the MPC's preference is in
terms of delivering the inflation target - which is set out in a
letter to the Chancellor under the remit.  And I would suggest
that that horizon is not entirely consistent with that
preference, and that's a mild way of putting it.
But let me just recap the core of your question, which is -
you're right - unsecured credit growth growing at 8% for
consumers; house price - and this bounces around a bit, but
we do see house price growth picking up.  And in fact we see
activity in the housing market picking up, albeit with respect
to activity in the housing market, picking up from a relatively
low level.  And we do have to be - and I should say as well,
we should also have over the course of the forecast, a further
fall in the savings rate over the course of the forecast, to
historically low levels, as it is now measured.
So we are conscious of those developments and, as an
institution as a whole, we do have to think about the balance
in the recovery and the potential financial stability
implications of those developments or an accentuation of
those developments might be a better way to put it.  And that
does bring into scope some macroprudential considerations.
One aspect - I would highlight that what we have been seeing
in terms of underwriting standards in the housing market is
that high loan to income - underwriting standards have
improved in the housing market steadily since the spring of
last year.  So those types of risk have reduced.  The number
of distressed households - and we'll be coming out with the
Bank NMG survey early in the new year, but the number of
distressed and vulnerable households have continued to go
down.  Those are households, as you know, who have sort of
above 40% debt serviced income ratios.  So that has gone
down.  The overall levels of debt to income have gone down
as well.  But that's not to say those trends couldn't reverse,
and we do have to be conscious of that.  We have to be
conscious of that - and I'll finish here, and maybe Ben, I don't
know if you want to supplement, but we have to be conscious
of that - first and foremost from a macroprudential
perspective because we do have those tools and so the co-
ordination with the FPC is important.
We do have to take into account, as the MPC, that dialogue
and the role of interest rates in all of this as well, particularly
if decisions are marginal.
Ben Broadbent:
No, no, just to say that there is a box on Household Balance
Sheets on Page 15 of the Report, if you want to read it, and
then as the Governor said, there'll be a further assessment of
the survey we do before the end of the year in the Quarterly
Bulletin.
Adam Parsons, BBC 5 live:
Governor, a word that both you and the Chancellor are quite
fond of using is symmetric.  And clearly we're at a period here
of very low inflation.  And in his letter to you, the Chancellor
says it is welcome news that we're at this very low
inflationary period, even though we're clearly 2 percentage
points off target.  I wonder whether you think there's a mixed
message there?  And also whether you think he would be
quite as relaxed if we were overshooting the inflation target
by 2%, in other words, if it was 4.1%?
Mark Carney:
It's - it's not going to surprise you - it's not for me to speak
for the Chancellor.  The only thing I'll observe in terms of our
forecast, and I referenced in my comments, is that real
income growth has picked up to rates - the strongest rates
since the crisis.  Part of that is wage growth getting back to
3% and potentially with the prospect of going further -
certainly that's our expectation in the forecast.  But what also
contributes to that, obviously, is the low level of CPI inflation
at present.  And a low level that's predominantly affected by
imported disinflation - commodity prices, other imported
goods prices driven by importantly the strength of sterling.
We're not seeing - the judgement of the Committee is still
that inflation expectations are well-anchored, so this is, in our
view, a temporary period.  And we as a Committee have to
manage policy through that period.  Now the Chancellor or
others may look at a much shorter term horizon and the
implication's there - we're looking a little further up.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
I just want to return to the turn of the year comments.  Do
you still stand by those comments that you made back in July
and you've repeated?  Or have you changed your mind in the
light of these forecasts?  And, you know, people have been
fixing their mortgages on the back of your messages; I just
wondered if you felt like your messages - and obviously that
may have been an expensive decision now, so I just
wondered if you believe your messaging may not have been
helpful?
Mark Carney:
Well, the first thing is - and I'm a little reluctant to take this
Committee press conference into my personal views, because
that's not the spirit of it.
The comments and the perspective on how the decision gets
potentially tougher, if you will, and the decision is better
informed by the progress or not of the factors that influence
the prospects for inflation, and of course that still stands.  I
mean, that's absolutely - that's absolutely right.  The
decision, as I've stressed - and you know this, Phil - it's not,
not a pre-commitment, it's a decision.  And if you get to the
point, into the next year, after the year has turned, and it's
not the appropriate stance to raise interest rates, I - as any
of the members of the Committee - if it's our judgement that
it isn't the right time to raise interest rates, we won't vote for
an interest rate increase, regardless of what had been said
previously.
Has the prospect of normalisation increased as the recovery
has progressed?  Absolutely.  Is it prudent for people to take
that into account?  By the way, for reference, about two
thirds of households, on the basis of various survey
measures, expect that interest rates will begin to increase at
some point over the course of the next 12 months.  Given, as
forecast, that is a reasonable expectation.  But we'll have to
see what transpires, both domestically, but as we are
reminded repeatedly, what matters as well is what happens
beyond our shores and the impact of that on inflation.  So
we'll take our decisions at the right time and appropriate to
achieve our objectives.
David Smith, Sunday Times:
Governor, if we look at the influences on inflation in recent
years - the big influences - and the rise and then the fall in
commodity and energy prices, the fall and then the rise in
sterling, and if we look at the things the MPC monitors quite
closely, such as spare capacity - that doesn't seem to be
particularly well-related to what happens to core inflation.  So
over the past two or three years, we've seen a tightening of
capacity, but a fall in core inflation.
I mean, does this - you know, not to be rude about this, but
does this reduce the role of the MPC to that of a spectator
when these big global developments are happening?
Mark Carney:
The - in terms of - this is a crucial question both in terms of
the relationship - I mean, historic relationships have been
amplifying this - there's been a reasonable relationship in the
UK between - there's a reasonable wage Phillips curve in the
UK, so the relationship between various measures of labour
markets - particularly unemployment and wages.  There has
been a less robust relationship - a price Phillips curve, so the
ultimate translation of those wage developments into prices.
Now that's partly - one can posit that that's partly because of
the openness of the economy.  The degree of pass-through -
the very fact that this is a very open economy, that's subject
- and its consequence is subject to foreign shocks whether it's
through the exchange rate or just through imported good
prices, positively or negatively.  That breaks down that
relationship, or it reduces that relationship - it's less tight
than it is at the core.
But by the same token, domestic wages, 50% of domestic
cost - domestic costs are a very important determinism in
inflation, we have to manage policy to look through.  And we
can influence, and I think do influence, the evolution of those
prices.
So when we look at the forecast - and I'll pass to Ben now -
when we look at the forecast at present, we do see - as you
rightly point out - these vague external factors.  We've been
refining our view in terms of over what horizon they impact
inflation, but eventually - unless you have a better model
than we do in terms of ability to predict the next big oil price
shock, up or down, we're going to look through that and
influence that which we can, which are largely those domestic
factors.
Ben Broadbent:
I think that's absolutely right.  The only thing I'd say is that,
even though we've always been open, I think it's right to say
that these overseas influences have probably got noisier over
time.  It's partly because of the crisis, partly also because
we're trading with countries - unlike the period, say, prior to
the mid-'90s - who are very different from us, much more
than we used to.  And trade between emerging and advanced
economies has grown a lot, and in that environment you're
likely to have big relative price moves.
All that said, these generally don’t last - don't have enduring
effects on inflation.  And I think it's still the case that what
matters if you look two, three years ahead, on the
assumption that you don't get hit by more of these shocks -
and they're unforecastable essentially - what matters is the
domestic cost growth.
So it's become noisier, but I don't think it's the case that it
means we don't control inflation any more.
[No Microphone], The Guardian:
You talk in the Report about resilient sort of momentum in
the UK despite fiscal consolidation.  To what extent have you
factored in the fiscal consolidation that's still to come,
particularly in the Spending Review?  And if you haven't, to
what extent should we expect a very different picture in
February?
Mark Carney:
We have incorporated the Government's current fiscal plans
in their entirety, as you would expect.  The way we treat
fiscal is - if there's a change, if there's a legislated change, if
through either the Autumn Statement or the subsequent
budget the Government changes fiscal stance, we will then
incorporate it into our forecast.  We won't make adjustments
on news, if you will, or on speculation about fiscal.  And so
the broad brush of the fiscal consolidation is incorporated in
our forecast.
And I would note that that fiscal consolidation is - you know,
it's material.  On the OBR numbers the reduction, the annual
reduction in the - and you can take these numbers with a
grain of salt, but the cyclically adjusted budget deficit is about
a percentage point per annum over the course of each of the
next four years, whereas on average it averaged a little less
than half a percentage point on the same measure for each of
the last three years.  It was volatile but it moved around.
Those are the OBR numbers, those aren't ours.
But that gives you a sense that - yes, there's a meaningful
fiscal consolidation; I don't think that's news.  It's
incorporated in the forecast and the point we make in the
Report and that I made in my opening statement is that we
see resilient, in fact robust, private domestic demand, even
given that fiscal consolidation.  So there's quite an offset
we're seeing from the household sector and business
investment.
Richard Barley,
Wall Street Journal:
Governor, you've mentioned a couple of times the moves in
risky assets that we've seen in the last few months and
there's a reference in the minutes to [short gap in audio]
uncertainty about the global economic output.  Elite volatility
has also been down to uncertainty over global monetary
policy.  Is there a risk of a feedback loop developing here?
Or to put it another way, how much are central banks part of
the problem as much part of the solution?
Mark Carney:
Well, let me first sort of make a macro point, which is - as we
were putting together this forecast, and given as I say the
sort of Group of asset prices, consolation of asset prices that
exist including risky asset prices, volatility, bank funding
spreads, other aspects, you know there are impacts,
obviously there are wealth effects and there's that channel,
but importantly the sort of cost of capital channel to
businesses is there.  And then you have to make an
assessment on top of that in terms of uncertainty and the
impacts of uncertainty on investment.
What matters, as you know, Richard, is persistence of moves.
And so we've seen a recovery in the last few days; we'll see
how long that persists.
I would give a view which is consistent with the Report; I'll
maybe put a finer point on it.  It would appear that in the
course of - and maybe, Minouche, I'll ask you to amplify on
this.  In the course of the last three months, certainly since
events in August, largely related to China, happened, that
markets began to ascribe a bigger probability to a more
severe downturn globally, so there's greater uncertainty and
you had bimodal distributions.
And that in part what we've seen is that markets' views, the
collective view of the market, has shifted with time, with
data, but also with central bank attitudes towards those
prospects.  So partly what's been read into some major
central bank statements has been a different view of the
relative risks of a bad outcome if you will in emerging
markets and that cascading through advanced economies.
And you know, in the run up to this forecast there was
greater weight on that; in the last few days there's been less
weight on that channel - I would say broad brush.  But maybe
just …
Minouche Shafik:
Yes, I mean you're right to say that we saw quite a bit of
volatility in August, I mean the VIX reached levels that we
hadn't seen since 2011.  But I mean, I think as the Governor
has said that was driven by a reassessment of expectations
for growth prospects for emerging markets.
Some of that has been retraced in October and so we've seen
a retrenchment and an improvement in that.  But I think it's
also part of a wider phenomenon of more episodes of
volatility in financial markets after a very long period after the
crisis in which volatility was really unusually low.  So in some
sense we're sort of going back to normal when we have these
sort of episodes and volatility in the period prior to the great
moderation.
Ben Chu, The Independent:
Governor, these figures you've put out today make it quite
clear that the flattening of the yield curve since August is
playing quite a large role in getting inflation back to target
over the horizon.  I know you'll be reticent to deal in
hypotheticals, but if the yield curve hadn't flattened in that
way and hadn't delivered that stimulus, is it totally crazy to
imagine that you and the MPC would have this week have
been considering possible extra stimulus, maybe even a rate
cut?
Mark Carney:
Well, the first thing is to put some of the flattening into
perspective if I may, which will seem like a technical point,
but it's important; which is that there was a bigger flattening
in the curve that was used for this forecast.  A lot of that has
now been retraced in the last few days, but there's a bigger
flattening of the curve out three years and beyond, certainly
at the ten year as well.
But over the horizon that's most relevant for where inflation
ends up at the end of the horizon because of the lags in
monetary policy, the flattening was more modest.  So in the
order - I mean if you go out one year for the curve used, it's
about ten basis points of flattening versus odds.  The point
being - the curve has been for some time - has been very flat
out through 18 months or so.  And that's part of the reason
why you get relatively small moves in that curve.  And the
implied lift-off date for market measures moves quite
dramatically, whereas the views of informed market
commentators - are much more static, are much more slow
to move.
And so one can read too much into those curves near or out
and it's an important caution in all of this.  Because what
matters, as you know, for the ultimate impact on inflation -
not just getting it back to target but keeping it there - is the
sort of cumulative tightening, the integral, if I can say that, of
tightening over the policy horizon.  So it's a very basic point,
so the curve had flattened but it hasn't flattened as much as
it might seem.
On top of that you had quite a bit move in risk - the prices of
risk assets which flow through the forecast, which has a
dampening effect on the forecast.
You're right in your preface to the question that I'm not going
to engage in hypotheticals and speculate on what we might
have done if the world had been different, but the world
wasn't different and we dealt with the one we had.
Hugo:
Governor, the minutes of this month's meeting note that
investors have been unwilling to position for increases in UK
interest rates, having lost money on similar strategies in
recent years.  Given everything you've said about the
importance of the market yield curve and all that business,
how concerned are you that your message is losing credibility
in the markets and among those investors?
Mark Carney:
We're not - not at all.  I mean the question is whether the
market adjusts to developments in the economy, both
domestically and abroad.  And in the wake of some
disinflationary forces - the markets' global perception of
disinflationary forces.  So the market took on average a view,
since August, I would suggest, that the global economy was
going to slow more markedly than had been anticipated.
You had a sharp sell-off in a series of commodity prices and
certainly leaving sterling as a whole still up substantially and
still up - in a manner that was relevant for the inflation
horizon, on the margin and the market had a reduction in the
likely degree of monetary stimulus recognising what our likely
reaction function would be.  Directionally it all adds up and
makes sense.
Now the market is informed by our updated forecast,
recognising prices have moved around a bit.  It should be
informed by our perspective in terms of our optimal trade-off,
which is very clearly set out in the letter to the Chancellor.  I
repeated it several times here, it's in the monetary policy
statement, it's thought through in terms of the optimal time
to get back.
The views on policy and the optimal shape of the curve of the
market will continue to adjust with developments in the UK,
with developments in Europe, with developments in the US -
all our major trading partners.  So - entirely comfortable with
it.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk:
A lot of the questions you've answered here I've had but one
from a few of my listeners.  The range of views on the MPC,
you say there's a wide range of views.  Has that widened
since last Report or has that narrowed in terms of the
progress?  You mentioned resiliency and robustness of the
economy so, with that in mind and do the MPC members have
a narrower view of where we’re going to go with the
economy?
Mark Carney:
Thanks, Harry.  I'm probably not going to get into the second
derivative of range of views of members of the Committee.  I
mean the Committee signed up to the forecast, the
Committee has a common view on the likely path of interest
rates - limited and gradual increases once rates begin to rise.
There's one member of the Committee, as you know, who
believes now is the time to begin those rate increases; for
others it’s not yet the appropriate point.  But those decisions
will be taken subsequently.
There are a series of places, as you know, in the minutes -
and I’ll finish with this, where there is a range of views of
member of the Committee whether it’s around the output
gap, whether it’s around the speed of pass-through, whether
it’s around other aspects.  A lot of those factors cancel out in
the aggregate in the forecast.  I’ll give you one final example,
which is that there are certainly arguments that the rate of
productivity growth could continue to accelerate or could
continue at this level, given that it’s now picked up, which
would increase the potential growth in the economy.
There are arguments on the other side, though, that - on the
labour market that perhaps the participation rate won’t go as
high as we had assumed, or that desired average hours won’t
be as much.  And there's some element of that may offset
each other.  We’ll do, as our intent is, is not to update these
things every time we have an MPC meeting, but to do a sort
of comprehensive stock take which we’ll do in the new year.
Szu Chan, The Daily Telegraph:
In your opening remarks you talk about the forecast
balancing domestic strength and foreign weakness, but in the
minutes it even suggests that while domestic strength is
strong, wages and unit labour costs need to pick up a little bit
further to sustain the 2% inflation target.
In front of MPs at the Treasury Select Committee, you talked
about unit labour costs, if they edged up into the 2s and wage
growth going up into the 3s it would bring the decision to
raise rates into sharper relief.  Could you give us a broader
idea of what you’re looking for domestically in order to return
targets sustainably and not overshoot?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, well we have - we actually gave you a decent sense of
that in the Report in terms of historic levels of wage growth
and implied unit labour costs around that.  One thing - one of
the big questions as you know, Szu, is where will productivity
growth get to?  So we have a - our forecast for average
weekly earning wage is - sorry average weekly earnings, one
measure of wage growth, compensation growth, gets to
historic averages by 2018.  So it gets nearly there by late
2016 into 2017, around 4%, then gets slightly above it into
2018.
We don’t bring productivity - we don’t think productivity will
necessary get back up to historic levels by that point, which
means that - all things being equal - unit labour costs are
going to run a little stronger than they had in the past.  Some
of that gets offset by other factors which dampen a potential
continuation of foreign disinflation.  I'm not talking about
sterling pass-through, but just relatively lower foreign prices
given the global outlook.  And that’s consistent - well it’s not
fully consistent with the target because the point is it
overshoots in the end by a notable level, so we have to take
that into account as a Committee, and think about what is the
right policy response for that.
When we met this week the right policy response was not to
adjust interest rates - that was the view of the Committee.
But that wouldn’t necessarily be the case and be consistent
with exactly the way you framed it which is - what’s
consistent with hitting the target and staying there?  So
again, if you look at the forecast, if you look at the evolution,
if the world transpires as we forecast in terms of the growth
of wages, the outlook for productivity, it would require more
tightening than is in the implied market curve in order to
sustainably - to have inflation sustainably at target.  I mean
that’s about as bluntly as I can put it.
Andy [Break in audio]:
Economists polled by Reuters expect central bank policy
around the world to diverge quite a bit next year, obviously
with the Fed and the Bank of England perhaps looking to raise
interest rates at some point and the European Central Bank,
the eurozone and Japan and China probably going the other
direction.
What discussions has the Bank of England had with other
central banks about how this will all fit together and how
much does this divergence feature in your thinking on
monetary policy for Britain?
Mark Carney:
Well the - I mean we meet almost continually, it feels like
sometimes, as central banks.  We’ll be meeting again this
weekend as you probably know in Basel.  And the core of our
discussions we have is about what’s fundamentally going on
in each other’s economies, it’s an understanding of real and
nominal factors in each other’s economies.
Yes, we do have some discussions in terms of respective path
for policy, but I would say that in this era of central banking
that there is not much that’s discussed that isn’t in the public
domain anyway.  It’s just - I mean, Minouche, you might
want to speak to this and your G7 discussions, but it’s just a -
yes, it is a chance to be sitting around a table with the people
who are at press conferences like this, but they’re not saying
- okay I said X at the press conference, but let me tell you
what we’re really going to do.
Minouche Shafik:
I couldn’t agree more.  I mean you do get a bit more detail in
some of these discussions and a bit more candour, but the
basic policy messages are the same.  I mean the good thing
is that this co-ordination does happen and there is very good
awareness of the expected actions of other central banks, and
obviously taken into account and to our own thinking.
Mark Carney:
And I’d just underscore that point which is "expected"
actions.  And it’s expected actions of the individuals, so
there's no central bank, there is no major - I’ll tell you and
give you deep insight.  There is no major central bank, the
Bank of England included, that knows what it’s going to do at
its next meeting, in the first quarter or second quarter of next
year.  Every major central bank has a framework that is
guiding that discussion.  Obviously it has an objective but it
has a framework of the most important factors that could
influence that decision, and obviously different individuals
weigh different factors differently.  But there's no way direct
game path.
And the only time in my experience as - for what it’s worth -
as a G7 Governor that that was different was in the depth of
2008 when we basically agreed that we would do certain
things in some order.  And even then on the margin there
were some pretty big decisions that needed to be made.
Mike Bird, Business Insider:
Over the weekend ECB President Mario Draghi revised his
own view in an interview that the ECB’s deposit rate couldn’t
be cut further into more deeply negative territory.  I don’t
expect you to comment on the ECB policy, obviously, but he
referenced experiences in countries like Sweden and
Switzerland, which have implemented more steeply negative
policy rates seemingly without any sort of flight to cash - they
seem fairly manageable.  Has the experience of those
countries adjusted the Bank of England’s understanding of
the tools it would have to tackle this in the future?
Mark Carney:
Thank you for the question.  We - let me preface this with a
statement of the obvious which is - our discussion was not
about easing options - okay, absolutely clear.  We didn’t
discuss easing options.  We discussed whether or not to
tighten policy, appropriate time to tighten policy, etc.  And
you see the vote and so you know the outcome of that.
What we have done, as you’re probably familiar, is that we
did some work about six months ago, nine months ago
probably now, where we looked more closely at what the
effect of lower bound was in the UK.  The reason we stopped
at half a percentage point, the MPC several years ago stopped
at half a percent, is the feeling was couldn’t lower rates more
than that without A, causing disruption in money markets,
that’s now more of an open question, but B, I think really the
binding constraint was the profitability of the building society
sector and the impact that would have, given the capital - the
need to rebuild capital then.  And that was a legitimate
concern, and so it would have been not loosening, it would
have tightened given the importance of building societies.
Now building societies have rebuilt capital, they’re in a better
position and we have updated our view, which is that we
think - if we ever needed to, we could cut rates from this
level, and in fact I'm sure I reference that, I do reference that
in the letter again, if we ever needed to.
We’re not in that world, we’re not contemplating.  It’s not
clear that that extends as deeply as, say, where the
Reichsbank has gone.  I’ll make one other point on this
though which is the fact that we’re not at the zero lower
bound any more, or the effective lower bound, loosens
somewhat the sort of risk management arguments that one
sometimes hears around the optimal stance of policy and the
prospective start of any tightening cycle.
Ben Broadbent:
It’s also important to understand they have different systems
of setting interest rates and different rules for reserves.
These are marginal deposit rates, paid only on a certain
proportion of reserves.  We set a single interest rate on all
however many 300-odd billion of reserves are on the system.
So we have a slightly different system and all else equal that
will reduce our capacity to …
Mark Carney:
Yeah.  This is a crucial point because the extent to which the
negative interest rate flows through actually to the customer,
if you will, is much diminished when you have that type of
reserve setting framework.  Now obviously the more negative
you go, and on a bigger proportion it ultimately can flow
through, but it doesn’t flow through as quickly.  But in our
system it is more immediate and so these things are more
binding, right.
Mario Blascak,
World Business Press Online:
Governor Carney, does the MPC look at the Taylor monetary
rule as an option to view the monetary policy decisions?  And
if so, would that be the original Taylor rule or the modified
with Okun's law?
Mark Carney:
We’d hope the modified.  I’ll let you take that one.
Ben Broadbent:
Can I say one thing about this Taylor rule?  The Taylor rule is,
when it was first written down, was not a prescriptive rule, it
was not meant to suggest here’s how you should set
monetary policy.  It was simply a description of the way the
Fed behaved over a certain period of time.
Second point I’d make is this: it’s not robust as a rule to the
kind of variations we talked about early on in the natural
equilibrium rate of interest.  Our objective is the inflation
target, and we take an assessment each month what level of
interest rate is necessary to hit that and we do not tie
ourselves to some particular feedback rule, and certainly not
that one.
Facilitator:
Thank you very much everybody, that’s all we’ve got time for.
We look forward to seeing you next time.
