MONETARY POLICY REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE
Thursday 2 November 2023
Opening Remarks by Andrew Bailey, Governor
Today’s monetary policy decision
Inflation is falling.  And we expect it to keep falling this year and next.  Our increases
in interest rates are working to bring inflation back to the 2% target.
So today we have voted to maintain Bank Rate at 5.25%.  Monetary policy remains
restrictive.
Let me be clear, there is absolutely no room for complacency.  Inflation is still too
high.  We will keep interest rates high enough for long enough to make sure we get
inflation all the way back to the 2% target.  We will be watching closely to see if
further increases in interest rates are needed.  But even if they are not, it is much too
early to be thinking about rate cuts.
Let me first talk about inflation over the coming months.  Then I will turn to the
outlook for the economy and inflation further ahead and what it means for monetary
policy.
The near-term outlook for inflation
Chart 1, from today’s Report, shows consumer price inflation and its components
since 2019.  It shows how inflation has continued to fall since our previous Report in
August.
Chart 1: Consumer price inflation has fallen and is projected to fall further
Contributions to consumer price inflation
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, ONS and Bank calculation
Much as we expected, inflation took a step down in the data for July published two
weeks after the August Report.  As you can see in our near-term projection, shown
in the shaded area, we expect inflation to take another – larger – step down in
October’s data when it is published in two weeks’ time.  From 6.7% in September,
we think it will probably fall to just below 5%.  We then expect it to remain around
that level for the rest of year.
The dark orange bars show that this fall is driven in large part by energy prices.  But
gradually falling inflation for food and other goods will help too – as shown by the
narrowing purple and blue bars.
Ofgem’s price cap means that we can be confident about the contribution from
household energy bills to lower inflation over the coming months.  But any projection
is uncertain.  There are upside risks to inflation from energy prices following the
tragic events in the Middle East.  And there remains uncertainty about the time it will
take other non-energy components of inflation to come down as well.
Chart 2 shows the evolution of our near-term inflation projections and compares
them with the outturns in the data.  The blue line is actual inflation.  The ‘stalks’ are
our near-term forecasts from successive Monetary Policy Reports – in different
colours from November last year.
As you can see, the data have come in broadly in line with our near-term projections
over the past year.  But in the past few months, inflation outturns have come in
somewhat lower than we had expected.  And we now project inflation to be a little
lower over the remainder of this year than we did in August.
Most of the downside news since August reflects lower core goods price inflation.
And food inflation has also come down a little faster than we expected.
Chart 2: Headline inflation has been broadly in line with forecasts this year
Projections from successive Monetary Policy Reports and data outturns
Sources: ONS and Bank calculation
While services inflation is also slightly lower than we expected in August, it remains
elevated, and it now contributes more to overall inflation than the prices of energy,
food and other goods.
It is important that services inflation falls steadily over next year.  To achieve that, we
need to see an easing of underlying cost pressures in the UK economy.
The medium-term outlook
That brings me to the medium-term outlook.
In the face of the series of significant economic shocks that have hit us in recent
years, overall demand in the economy has proved resilient, supported by a very tight
labour market.
But there are increasing signs that higher interest rates are weighing on economic
activity.  We see that in weaker official activity data and in a range of business
surveys.
As we describe in some detail in today’s Report, the Monetary Policy Committee
always takes a collective steer from a wide range of indicators to inform its view of
labour market developments.  And the overall message from these indicators is that
– while it remains tight in an historical context – the labour market has loosened, and
by a little more than projected in August.
Chart 3 shows how most indicators of employment growth are easing.  This includes
the Purchasing Managers Index for composite employment intentions (in light blue)
and the permanent staff placement index (in dark orange).  The official measure (in
purple) has also weakened.  But this last series can be volatile, and there are
Chart 3: Most indicators of employment growth are softening
Indicators of three-month on three -month employment growth
Sources: Bank Agents, HMRC, KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P Global/CIPS and Bank
calc.
increased uncertainties around it following the suspension of the Labour Force
Survey by the ONS.
To inform the MPC’s assessment, Bank staff feed all of these indicators into a model
to estimate a measure of underlying employment growth.  This is a long-standing
practice, but the challenges with the official data reaffirm the importance of taking
such steers from a wide range of data sources.
The model-based estimate is shown in Chart 4 (in blue), along with the official data
(in orange).  As you can see, the estimated measure for employment growth has
gradually slowed since 2021, cutting through the volatility in the official data.  The
indicator-based model suggests that employment will be broadly flat over the second
half of this year.
There are other signs that the labour market is loosening.  The number of vacancies
has fallen and unemployment has ticked up.
Despite the softening in the labour market, nominal wage growth remains much
higher than would be consistent with the inflation target, if sustained at these rates.
The ONS measure of annual growth in regular average weekly earnings in the
private sector was 8.0% in August, higher than expected.
This continued strength in wage growth has persuaded the MPC to raise slightly its
assessment of the ‘medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment’ and also its
estimate of persistence in wage and price inflation.  In effect, the MPC judges that
the weakening in the labour market has been driven in part by a lower supply of
labour and not just demand.  This would help to explain the continued strength in pay
growth even as employment growth has eased.
Chart 4: An indicator-based model points to flat employment in 2023 Q4
Measures of quarterly employment growth
Sources: Bank ofEngland,HMRC, KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS,
and S&P Global/CIPS
While all measures of current pay growth remain elevated, the recent pick-up in the
official measure of private sector wages has not been matched by other indicators.
This is illustrated in Chart 5.  The Bank’s Decision Maker Panel (in yellow), HMRC
payroll data (in dark orange), and the Indeed Wage Tracker (in purple) all point to
wage growth closer to 7%, below the official data (in blue).  The Bank’s Agents
continue to report that average annual pay settlements have been in the region of 6
to 6.5%.
That is why, when assessing the evidence of inflation persistence, the MPC will
continue to monitor all available data on pay growth very carefully.
Weaker demand and a softer labour market are signs that monetary policy is
restrictive.  The effects of higher interest rates continue to weigh on economic
activity throughout the forecast we have presented today.
Chart 6 shows the MPC’s projection for growth in the UK economy, conditional on
market interest rates.  GDP is projected to remain broadly flat through 2024.  Growth
then recovers over the second half of the forecast period.  It remains below historical
averages, however, reflecting both restrictive monetary policy and subdued potential
supply growth.
Chart 5: Private sector regular pay growth is higher than other indicators
Measures of annual private sector wage growth
Sources:Bank of England, Indeed, ONS and Bank calculations
On balance, the margin of excess demand has diminished over recent quarters, and
we expect an increasing degree of economic slack to emerge from the start of next
year.  This will help to reduce inflation pressures in the UK economy, alongside
declining external cost pressures.
Chart 7 shows the implications for consumer price inflation.  In the MPC’s central
projection, which is conditional on the market path for interest rates, inflation is more
likely to end the forecast below the 2% target than above it, albeit only slightly.  In
the modal – or ‘most likely’ – case, inflation is 1.9% in two years’ time and ends the
forecast at 1.5% in the fourth quarter of 2026.  The Committee continues to judge,
Chart 6: GDP growth projection
Based on market interest rate expectations
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations
Chart 7: CPI inflation projection
Based on market interest rate expectations
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations
however, that risks around that central case are skewed towards higher inflation.
Adjusting the modal projection for the balance of risk, the mean – or ‘expected’ –
path for inflation is just above the 2% target in two years’ time and just below it
towards the end of the three-year forecast period.
The MPC’s alternative projection, conditioned on a constant level of Bank Rate at
5.25% over the forecast period, has CPI inflation somewhat lower than the projection
conditioned on the market path, especially toward the end of the forecast period.  In
the mean forecast, inflation is expected to be right at the 2% target in two years’
time, rather than slightly above it, and fall to 1.6%, rather than 1.9%, at the end of the
forecast period.  This is because the market path begins to decline gradually from
the current level of Bank Rate towards the end of next year so that the constant-rate
path is above the market path in the final two years of the forecast.
Monetary policy is currently restrictive in the sense that, if we maintain this stance for
long enough, we will squeeze inflation out of the system.
That is what we will do.  This also means being on watch for further signs of inflation
persistence that may require interest rates to rise again.  But we should not keep
monetary policy restrictive for excessively long.  We have to be mindful of the
balance of risks between doing too little and doing too much.
How long a restrictive stance will be needed will ultimately depend on what the
incoming data tell us about the outlook for inflation over the medium term.
The MPC’s latest projections indicate that monetary policy is likely to need to be
restrictive for quite some time yet.
Returning inflation to the 2% target remains our absolute priority.
With that, Ben, Dave and I will be happy to take your questions.
