Bank of England
Inflation Report Q&A
6th August 2015
Robert Peston, BBC:
Governor, with unemployment rising slightly and in fact
employment growth slowing, and on your forecast inflation at
at or near zero for rather longer than you thought back in
May, isn't it a bit bonkers to start talking about interest rate
rises?
Mark Carney:
A couple of things.  First, the near-term outlook for inflation is
muted, as I said, and it wouldn't be surprising if we have
another month or two of negative inflation, given the very
substantial moves in oil prices and the changes to some of
the utility prices as well.  We've seen big moves in oil, big
moves in other commodities, but also some changes to utility
prices.
And those mechanically go into the CPI calculation.  It makes
a real difference to households in terms of their disposable
income.  But they're one-off effects, so we put them into our
near-term forecast.  They won't be around - those effects in
inflation won't be around in the 18 to 24 month horizon over
which we can influence the rate of inflation.
So our expectation is that the rate of inflation is going to pick
up, and the issue for the MPC is to ensure that it picks up in a
sustainable manner - that it first gets back to target in a
timely fashion (we say within two years).  But we don't want
it just to get back to target in order to shoot through the
target.  We want it to get back to target and, all things being
equal, to keep it at the target of 2%.
So it will be consistent, in our judgement - our best collective
judgement, in order to achieve that, it will be consistent with
rate increases - to a limited and gradual extent, but also rate
increases the timing of which, in our judgement, has moved
closer than the time that was in May.  Because this is not just
about inflation, as you know, over the course of the next few
months, but inflation for the medium term, so people don't
have to worry about inflation, so people can enjoy the
dividend, if you will, of lower petrol prices, lower food prices
today, without worrying about a payback in the medium
term.
Robert Peston, BBC:
And the jobs market -
Mark Carney:
The jobs market - important question.  What we've seen in
the jobs market - first off, big picture, taking a step back as I
did in my opening remarks.  If you look over the last couple
of years, we've had one of the strongest employment
performances not just in the advanced world, but also in the
UK's history.  And you can cut that a number of different
ways.  I used the unemployment rate - 2 percentage point
fall.
In the very recent employment numbers, we have seen a
slight fall in employment and slightly less contribution from
average hours.  Now there's a couple of potential
interpretations of what has happened.  One would be that
there are actually congestion effects in the labour market.  So
in other words, as the labour market tightens - and we see
that tightness in a number of ways: the vacancies to
unemployment rate is back at historic averages; job to job
churn has moved up quite sharply; the amount of short-term
unemployment is back down below historic averages - a
bunch of signs of that tightness in the labour market, so the
movements may take time, so you may get these sort of blips
that are there.
The other thing which does appear to be happening - and
we'll learn more about that with time - the other thing that
does appear to be happening is that we may be seeing this
pick-up in productivity that's there.  And that is very good
news for the sustainability of the recovery.  It means that the
wage growth that we have seen - and we have seen a
notable, a marked pick-up in wage growth over the course of
the past six months - that is very welcome.  The extent to
which productivity is filling in around that, that means that
that wage growth is more sustainable as well and so it all
goes well for the sustainability of the recovery.
So I would not interpret - we would not interpret the recent
job news as negative for the sustainability of the recovery.
And in fact it's borne out - I'll finish here - it's borne out in
our forecast which has GDP growing slightly above historic
averages for most of the forecast horizon, and the economy
ending up in excess demand.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:
Governor, in the middle of last month in a speech in Lincoln,
you said that the decision as to when to start such a process
of adjustment - in other words putting up interest rates - will
likely come at a sharper relief around the turn of this year.
What's changed, if anything, in the economy that would
adjust when borrowers might expect the first rise in interest
rates, in those three weeks?
Mark Carney:
Well, a couple of things.  One is that my speech in Lincoln is
my personal view and I'm here, as Ben and Minouche are,
representing the Committee.  I was very clear, though, that I
was talking about the decision about whether to raise interest
rates from my perspective would come into sharper relief
around the turn of the year, just to be precise.  And that is
consistent with the forecast in May, consistent with the
forecast that we have, in my judgement, today.
The point is that none of us on the Committee pre-commit to
any future rate increase, any future point in time that we
would increase interest rates.  We just took a decision today,
and as I said, the vote was 8-1.  But what we do see - and
this is relevant to the timing of rate increases - is an economy
where the slack in the economy is being used up, where we're
starting to see wages increase, where we're starting to see a
pick-up in unit labour cost, where we have some offsetting
effects, but the support for a rise in CPI inflation is building.
And as we move forward, we will be looking as individuals
and collectively as a Committee, for confirmation of the
recent trends, in order to make our individual and ultimately
collective decision of the timing of when to raise interest
rates.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:
Your view hasn't changed in those three weeks?
Jenny Scott:
Richard, if you could just keep it to one question.
Heather Stewart, The Guardian:
There's been quite a lot of activity, turmoil - to use a
journalistic term - in financial markets in recent weeks - a lot
of concern about the impact that a Fed rate rise later in the
year might have, quite a lot of action in the European
markets, bond markets because of what's happening in
Greece and also China - extraordinary turnaround in their
stock market.
How much weight do you attach to those concerns of financial
market dislocations, and how does that impact your thinking.
Mark Carney:
Well, I think the first thing I'd say is - I wouldn't characterise
what has happened recently in financial markets as being
turmoil.  I would characterise it as there's been volatility,
financial markets have been adjusting to news, the situation
in Greece was a steady feed of news about an important
situation.  I think we learnt a number of things through that
process, one of which was that some of the defences that
have been put in place by European authorities were holding,
importantly, and that is - it's consistent with the Committee's
view in terms of the scale of likely contagion if there were to
be an unfortunate outcome in Greece.
Obviously, events in China are important.  They're important,
first and foremost though, from a perspective of global
demand.  It's why we have one of our downside risks to
global growth.  The financial links to China are nowhere near
as strong as the scale of that economy would suggest.  Now
there are some financial links in the UK, but again, these
were not factors that were weighing on the Committee's
decision in any form.  I mean, we will have to make a
judgement about the precise timing of raising interest rates
and one can expect that there will be some tightening of
financial conditions as a consequence of that.  But that is part
of the purpose of raising interest rates, and we'll take that
into account.  So I wouldn't say that anything in the past few
weeks weighed on the Committee, except for trying to make
judgements about the fundamentals of these situations.
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Actually first of all, can I ask, in this new era of transparency,
do we just have one question per person or are we allowed
two?
Jenny Scott:
There's a lot of people to get through, Ed, so I'd rather you
started with one and then, if there's time -
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Okay, I will limit myself.  So last time around, in May -
Mark Carney:
And that was your one question, Ed.
Ed Conway, Sky News:
Last time around, you were quite worried about productivity,
and you mentioned that a number of times in the last
Inflation Report.  I just wonder, since then, we've had the
summer budget, we've had the government's productivity
plan.  Can you reflect on those and say, you know, are some
of those issues actually being solved or do we still have a
productivity problem?
Mark Carney:
Well, no, I - first thing, with all due respect to productivity
plans, those are plans for the medium term and they'll have
an impact - their impact will be seen in the fullness of time,
and they're not hugely relevant for the horizon over which we
conduct monetary policy.
In terms of the productivity puzzle, we have been
disappointed by the length of time it has taken for
productivity to pick up in this economy.  There are a variety
of ways we could cut the data, and justify why it's taken time.
Without fully explaining, I think we've been open, that we can
account for some of it, but not for all of it.
So I would say we are mildly encouraged to see the most
recent data which does have a pick-up in productivity.  Now I
just want to be clear what we have done with that, because
we haven't run to the other side of the boat as a consequence
of a few, you know, good reports.  We have taken about half
of that improvement in productivity into the forecast, so the
level of productivity at the end of the forecast is about .6
percentage points higher than it had been in May.  And so
what you'll see in our forecast is that the rate of productivity
growth over the forecast is slightly lower than we had it in
May.
That's being prudent.  There's probably going to be some -
there's always some volatility in the data and the productive
process doesn't move in a smooth line.  So we brought that
in.
But I will go back to my earlier comment, which is that it is
encouraging because the combination of the tightening of the
labour market and the improvement in productivity support
faster wage growth.  And so the pick-up in wage growth that
we have seen and we expect to continue is more firmly
grounded in that environment.
Siobhan Kennedy,
Channel 4 News:
Just to clarify, Governor, on the Lincoln speech where - do
you stand by, then, what you said about the potential for
rates rising at the turn of the year, because everything that
we've heard today would imply spring or even June of next
year.  So the two things seem a little bit confusing.
Mark Carney:
Let me clarify it for you.  I'm not sure it's necessary.  First
thing is - I'd recommend reading the actual speech, because I
didn't say rates increase around the turn of the year; I said,
exactly as Richard Edgar, who had read the speech, that the
decision around that comes into sharper relief.  That's the
first thing.
The second is that the forecast of the MPC, which takes into
account a variety of things that have - a variety of
developments, does not deliver a sustainable return of
inflation to target.  It brings inflation back to target in two
years, but it then overshoots; the economy then moves into
excess demand.
And so a judgement that has to be made individually and
ultimately collectively by members of the MPC is - all things
being equal - how would one adjust policy in order to have
policy slightly tighter than where the market is?  Which can
be an adjustment in terms of timing of the start of rate
increases or the cumulative amount of rate increases.  And
those are judgments that we'll make.
Taking a decision in August, Siobhan, a decision in August
which is not the turn of the year, about whether or not to
raise interest rates today is entirely consistent with what I
said in Lincoln.
Phil Aldrick, The Times:
There's conflicting data in the labour force stuff.  You've got
unemployment has been picking up a little bit, but you've also
got wages rising strongly, and you do a bit of analysis on this,
but you don't actually set out a conclusion.  And I just
wondered if you can provide some clarification around
whether you think the labour market is indicating that
conditions are tightening, on the balance of probabilities, or
whether the labour market is still providing ample room for
slack and there really is no tightening happening.  Because
there's mixed messages coming out of these reports.
Mark Carney:
Well there are cross currents in the labour market, there's
cross currents in the economy, because we are seeing in the
supply side of the economy - because as you observed,
longer suite of time there has been this big labour supply
shock, it's largely been absorbed.  We've had a slight uptick
in unemployment in the course of the last few months, but at
the same time we have seen a concurrent pick-up, apparent
pick-up, in productivity.
What the MPC has done is we've taken all those factors
together and made a judgement about the amount of excess
supply in the economy, the output gap if you will.  Our
judgement is it ends up in roughly the same place as it was in
May, about 0.5 percentage points of GDP.  Now there's a wide
range of views on the Committee about exactly where that is,
and it's an inexact science, to be polite.  So we do bring it
together in - we bring it to conclusion around the output gap.
But let me say a word about the labour market - actually I
might ask Ben to supplement - which is that the bigger
picture in the labour market is that the labour market is
tightening, and it is tightening and wages are beginning to
reflect that.  And, as I said to Ed Conway earlier, that the
performance of productivity, all things being equal, this end is
sustained, is supporting that wage growth, which is a
welcome development.  Now when you turn to actually labour
income, then you get into some complications.  But, Ben.
Ben Broadbent:
Yes, I won't add much.  As the Governor says, it's only in the
latest data you see this rise in unemployment.  The data are
also quite volatile on a short-term basis, so we'll have to see
whether this persists.
I might add that of course our forecasts had for a while
implied a slowing rate of employment growth and that's
probably what we're seeing.  Over the last two years we've
seen a significant tightening.  That's true in the rate of
unemployment; it's also true in other indicators, as the
Governor said, like vacancies.  A combination of that, plus
now a degree of productivity growth, is boosting real incomes
and we will see this year significant growth of real labour
incomes.
So I don't think the very latest data disturb a broad picture
which has been a feature of our forecasts I would say
throughout the last year.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:
I've got a question on the pound.  It seems to me, just from
your opening statement and some of the remarks in the
minutes, that the pound is really doing a lot of the tightening
for you, and so that's really the key factor in postponing an
interest rate increase.  But I would also wonder how confident
you are in your projections for inflation, given that the last
time we saw a big move in the pound, i.e. down a couple of
years ago the Bank's forecast didn't so well, and this
obviously admitted by - you know after the fact?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, no, a very timely - look there's been a big move in
sterling, 20% on a trade weighted basis since the trough of
March 2013 and a good - a notable chunk of that has come
between May and today as well.
What we have to do - and there is substantial exchange rate
pass-through in our inflation forecast; it does do a fair bit of
the work in terms of, as you say, keeping inflation down, not
just in the short term but over the relevant policy horizon.
And it's one of the reasons we need to see domestic costs
come up.
So one of the judgements we have to make is how much of
this is going to flow through to consumer prices.  And we
have been, as you would expect, looking very carefully about
what the recent history is, not just the further back history.
And there has been less of this being passed through than we
had previously assumed.  So one of the adjustments in this
Inflation Report is just to take that reality - the fact that there
has been less pass-through - and we've adjusted our forecast
accordingly.
So there's no question, there's no question that the strength
of sterling, the persistent strength of sterling, is having an
influence on policy, and it's one of the factors.  But it has to
persist.  We will take it into account.  But even taking it into
account, the strength of sterling, and even taking into
account the fiscal consolidation that we're going to see over
the coming years and the weakness in global demand, we see
robust private sector growth here, and consistent with that is
a need to begin to increase interest rates.  And the precise
timing will be determined, and as you've heard me say many
times, it will likely be limited and gradual, but sterling hasn't
taken away that requirement.
Catherine Boyle, CNBC:
Mr Carney, there's been a lot of focus recently on the Office
of National Statistics and some of its data has even been
criticised by the UK Statistical Authority.  And obviously a lot
of this data is what we're making your forecast based on.
How concerned are you about this and the rest of the
Committee?
Mark Carney:
Well, we have to work with what we're given.  No statistics
are perfect; they're all in some respect based on some degree
of surveys.  We have, I would say we have - the Committee
and certainly the staff of this institution have - a great
familiarity with the data we use and very close working
relations with the Office of National Statistics to understand
what's coming out.  And you see it in our forecast - I'll give
you one example, you see it in our forecast, both in terms of
when we forecast GDP, we forecast what is expect to come
out, but more importantly we forecast what we expect it
ultimately to be measured as, so that so called backcast.  And
often there's quite a substantial difference.  And in general,
those forecasts of the backcast have proven accurate.
Obviously, we care about this issue a tremendous amount, as
does everyone at the ONS.  We're very pleased to see Sir
Charlie Bean be appointed in his new role; we have seconded
people to assist him.  I can think of no better person in the
country to do the important work he's doing.
And I'll just finish with - you know, I think we do need to put
this in context, which is that all statistical agencies have to
continue to get better.  It's a constant effort to improve.  The
economy is always shifting, resources are always scarce and
the ONS is doing the best they can with the resources they
have.  And I am sure they will be improved by Sir Charlie's
work.
Emily Cadman, Financial Times:
Governor, your forecast makes it quite clear that you think
the consumers are going to be fundamentally the driving
force behind the recovery.  Savings ratios are declining,
house prices going up, is this sustainable and balanced going
forward?
Mark Carney:
Well, I think the first thing is to recognise that this is not a
debt-fuelled consumer recovery.  We have had - British
households have paid down about 30 percentage points of
debt relative to income over the course of the last several
years.  We would see only a modest sort of flattening of that
trend over the forecast horizon.
So households are consuming out of income.  They may be
drawing down their savings rate, as you rightly note, over the
course of that horizon, but they are being paid.  They're in
work; their wages are starting to increase; we think that their
incomes are going to rise further over the forecast horizon,
and so there is absolutely a sustainability to that aspect of
the recovery, particularly as productivity starts to fill in and
make the expansion more sustainable.  Thanks.
Ben Chu, The Independent:
Governor, a question about business investment.  You've
revised up your forecasts for investment this year and for the
subsequent two years, and the Inflation Report tells a quite
optimistic story about business investment.  But the Chief
Economist at The Bank, Andy Haldane, recently gave a
speech where he presented a less optimistic picture.  He said
that there might be a potential structural break on
investment due to the short termism of equity investors.  And
he suggested that might be one of the reasons why it's
underperformed since the financial crisis.  Is that a minority
view amongst the MPC and the Bank staff, of this this
something - an area that the Bank is actually looking at?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, well the first thing is - thanks for the question - I mean
the first thing to observe is Andy is a member of the MPC and
he signs up to the forecast, so this is the best collective
judgement of the MPC.  And as you rightly note, at the heart
of the forecast is this pick up in business investment.  I think
we have to remember that there were a few difficult years
here in the past where business investment was not strong,
not just because of the absence of demand, but difficulty in
obtaining financing.
Now we have certainly strong domestic demand; we have a
financial system that's working - it's virtually firing on all
cylinders.  If you look at financial conditions as a whole in the
country, they have continued to improve over the last several
years and they're quite attractive both in terms of costs and
availability of finance.  So it's more a question of opportunity.
I would put, I would pick up on the short termism element
and I would put Andy's speech, if I may, into its proper
context.  He's looking really at a medium term issue; he's
looking at issues of principal agent problems, corporate
governance issues, the structure of compensation, the
incentive structure around quarterly reporting, and other
issues, all important issues.  But these are medium-term
structural issues as opposed to questions which pertain
specifically to the forecast.
And I'd underscore that - yes, we have a strong forecast for
business investment, but it's consistent with strong domestic
demand; it's consistent with very healthy financial conditions;
and it's consistent with what we're hearing directly from
businesses themselves, both in terms of our surveys and
broader SIPPs and other surveys.
Ben Broadbent:
Just to point out that - you can see this in a chart, the chart
on Page 14, 2.8.  The fact is that business investment already
has been growing very strongly over the last couple of years.
You can see a growth rate hit 10% early last year, and this is
what tends to happen in economic recoveries.  So actually I
would say, you know, not untypically this is as much, if not
more, of an investment driven recovery as it is a consumer
spending driven recovery.
So as the Governor says, I think Andy's points were more
about the medium term.  That does not mean that one should
not expect to see the usual cyclical recovery in investment, it
is much the most cyclical component of aggregate demand.
Richard Barley,
Wall Street Journal:
Governor, could I take you to a couple of lines in the minutes,
one of which talks about moving rates earlier allowing a more
gradual adjustment and on the other hand an environment of
heightened uncertainty to benefits of waiting for more
information might be beneficial.  Is this heightened
uncertainty a fair judgement or it is a post-crisis over-
sensitivity to uncertainty, in that the future is always.
Uncertain when we get to the turn of the year and these
issues maybe come into sharper focus, things may still be
equally uncertain?
Mark Carney:
Yeah, Richard a couple of reasons I want to thank you for the
question.  I think the first thing is - you pick up on something
in the minutes which reflects a discussion that we obviously,
as appropriate, it reflects the discussion we had.  But we have
from time to time, as you would expect, sort of stepped back
conceptual strategic discussions if you will, deliberation type
discussions.
And what that refers to, that bit of the - and part of the point
of this process is actually that you get to see the minutes,
you get to ask us questions and we can explain it in real time,
as opposed to you just ponder them and then lose the
opportunity.  That bit in the minute refers to issues around a
risk management approach at the zero lower bound versus
some work that Charles Evans has done on the benefits of
waiting, which are interesting theoretical/policy questions.  I
would say, to characterise the central view of the Committee,
very much the collective judgement of the Committee is that
neither pertain to the United Kingdom at present.
So we're not sending a policy message here today, that the
world is all so uncertain, we can't decide what to do.  You
know there's always cross currents as I said earlier, but we
have a recovery that's turned into an expansion that's built
solidly on robust domestic demand.  We have tightening of
capacity, tightening of the labour market.  We have very low
inflation at present, but gradually building inflationary
pressures.  And the question is when to begin a process of
beginning to increase interest rates in a limited and gradual
fashion in order to keep inflation around target over the
medium term.
So no, we're not - I entirely agree with your characterisation.
Next time we're in front of you there will be lots of
uncertainty, some of which we won't have predicted, but
that's not a justification for permanent stasis.
Harry Daniels, Live Squawk:
It's a question really from my listeners, saying on the MPC is
there any sympathy or consideration to the Neofisherite view
that a sustained period of low interest rates could be
contributing to low inflation rather than preventing it?  So in
the sense - I know expectations have started to rise, but
slowly.
Mark Carney:
It certainly didn't - I don't recall it characterised in any of our
discussions.  I think what I would say, just to go to that
question, is - we did have a discussion.  I think there is some
sympathy that there - low interest rates can contribute to a
sort of passive forbearance in the financial sector, which as a
consequence can delay some of the necessary reallocation of
capital, births and deaths of companies, if you will, that are
necessary to support productivity growth.
So on the margin that's one potential explanation.  And so
you - you can have an environment as rates increase, that's
actually pro-productivity, if you will.  Now I wouldn't overplay
that and I wouldn’t say that's central.  But that's the one
observation, it's not a factor - we're not making that inverse -
Mike Bird, Business Insider:
I just wanted to ask - the labour market and wage figures
were a little bit surprising in comparison to what was thought
in the May Inflation Report.  For once obviously wages
surprising to the upside and unemployment to the downside.
Is there any concern about The Bank's understanding of
what's happening in the labour market, given that it seems to
have missed this trend a little bit and a couple of years ago it
very much missed the trend of much stronger employment
and much weaker wages and productivity?
Ben Broadbent:
I wouldn't call this is a trend.  I mean, as I say, we've seen it
in two or three months of data; I think we need a little longer
to call something a trend.  And every forecast has an error
surrounding it.  And as I said to an earlier question, actually if
you look at the shape of the path of unemployment, we'll do
it from your perspective, and indeed wage growth, the broad
shape is actually I would say close to what we've been
forecasting for quite some time.
So yes, it looks like in the second quarter of this year wage
growth will have been a little firmer than we were expecting
in May, employment growth weaker.  As it happens, that
leaves the most crucial single number from the labour market
- the growth of unit labour costs - pretty much exactly where
we expect it to be, just marginally below.
You referred to the forecast of unemployment and how
rapidly it fell 2013/'14, and that was surprising.  And it's a
part, or associated with, this productivity puzzle we've had.
And as the Governor said earlier, we have some ideas about
that.  We're never going to explain it fully, I think.  But I
wouldn't actually call the variations we've seen recently to be
on the same scale as that, I don't think they are.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:
Governor, is the overshoot in inflation three years out that
you spoke of a few minutes ago, is that a sign that interest
rates will probably rise faster, or may have to rise faster than
the market is currently expecting, as you detail in the
Inflation Report?
Mark Carney:
Look, I think what it says is that in the Committee's best
collective judgement that the market curve does not deliver a
sustainable return of inflation to target, because there is an
overshoot; the economy moves into excess demand.  Now
there are a range of outcomes around that, that's why we
have inflation Fan Charts, but that's the median of it, yes.
Sam Nussey, Nikkei:
In the July minutes it was noted that the appreciation of the
exchange rate could have an adverse impact on the balance
of growth in the economy and had occurred despite the large
current account deficit.  Are you concerned about the rise of
sterling, the impact that that could have on the balance of
growth, and whether it could be a risk for economic stability
in the future?  Thanks.
Mark Carney:
Well, I would say - let me speak for a moment - the three of
us are members of the Financial Policy Committee, which
looks at issues of economic stability.  And the current account
deficit is one of the top risks to financial stability over the
medium term.  It's sizable; in fact we used it to motivate our
stress test of banks last year, that if there were a disorderly
adjustment in the current account, what are the knock-on
effects for prices, for interest rates, for unemployment and
ultimately the housing market and bank balance sheets.  That
is not the base case that we expect, and in fact the very
process of going through that makes it less likely - that's part
of the point of stress tests.
But yes, we do think about it from a financial stability
perspective.  And one of the things that we're doing as an
institution is to ensure that the Financial Policy Committee is
talking to the Monetary Policy Committee so that we have -
we can share analysis and perspective, but we also
understand each other's concerns and what we might do
about it.  And those discussions include discussions around
the current account.
Mario Blascak,
World Business Press Online:
Governor, I would like to return to graduality issue or
graduality terminology.  Have you ever considered at the MPC
other than 25 basis points moves in interest rates because
there is a long - at least a year of history of gradual and
limited interest rate increase.  So would ten basis points do
the gig?
Mark Carney:
I’ll give you a straight answer.  The term gradual refers to
relative to past cycles.  The average increase, once the Bank
of England starts a - since the adoption of inflation targeting,
once the Bank had started raising interest rates, the average
increase per quarter was on the orders of magnitude of 37.5.
Discussion
Mark Carney:
Exactly, 37.5 per quarter.  So it’s relative to that level in
terms of rate increases per quarter, which gives us a sense
that we would proceed more slowly.
Directly in terms of your question, no, we have not had any
discussions of changing interest rates in anything other than
the traditional increments of 25 basis points.
And to be clear, of course one of the advantages of the
minutes is you see the proposition that is put in front of the
Committee.  And if we did ever have a discussion, just to be
absolutely clear, if we did have a discussion about something
like that, we would include it in the minutes and we would
disclose it so that you would know and raise it with us.
Kieran Williams, Live Squawk:
So we’ve recently had some upper revisions in the 2012 and
2013 GDP figures.  So seeing as the employment figures
won’t be revised over those periods, and actually productivity
was stronger in recent years than was actually thought, which
also means that productivity is close to its potential level, so
how do you anticipate that will affect your estimates going
forward?
Mark Carney:
Yeah well, it’s relatively modest in terms of productivity.  I
think it totals to about a percentage point cumulative over the
course of the two years, and the drift of productivity from
potential, historic potential, if you will, is north of 15
percentage points; it’s probably around 17 - I mean it’s a big
number.  It’s such a big number; I'm not even tracking it
anymore.
Now we don’t expect the economy to go back to historic
potential, not least because part of that trend of growth, not
least because part of that was from North Sea oil and gas and
obviously the economics of that have changed.  But a notable
proportion was from the financial sector, which proved to be
more ephemeral productivity.  And having put it on the right
track, we would expect the growth of productivity in the
financial sector to be lower than in the past.
Ferdinando Giugliano,
Financial Times:
Governor, I have a question about the appointment of
Gertjan Vlieghe which happened last week, and the following
comment by Andrew Tyrie from the select committee over his
business interests with Brevan Howard.
My question is whether you think in retrospect it was the right
decision to allow him to retain those ties?  He then eventually
sold the stake, but I was just wondering whether this initial
decision was right, especially as it later emerged that he
could actually cut his ties with the hedge fund.  So I was just
wondering what your opinion was now.
Mark Carney:
In the “full, full” hindsight- well let me say a couple of things.
First, I'm very much looking forward to working with Jan.
He's an outstanding economist, he's known to the Bank, he's
someone who has gone out and gotten more financial market
private sector experience and he's coming back to serve in
the public sector, and he should be commended for that.  And
I very much look forward to working with him, as do all our
colleagues.
In terms of appointments to the MPC, appointments to the
MPC are made by the Chancellor and determinations of
conflicts of interest and others are made by the Treasury.  So
they made the determination.  I'm a little loath to pass
judgement on those.
We have a code of conduct for members of the MPC and the
judgements, in consistency with the code of conduct, is
judgements made - the financial aspects of somebody’s
personal affairs, as you would expect, it’s not a judgement
that I make.  I don’t oversee the financial affairs of my
colleagues on the MPC.  Somehow I could imagine that might
create a conflict of interest somewhere along the line.
So it’s overseen by effectively our compliance within the
Bank, our Secretary of the Bank of England.  And Jan’s
arrangements were consistent with the code of the MPC
because it was a passive stake.  Now he took the judgement,
Jan took the judgement, to eliminate any possible
misperception of a conflict, to exit his stake and he arranged
that and I commend him for it.
But I’ll go back to my first comment which is I very much
welcome his willingness to serve the British people and look
forward to working with him.
Dan Hinge, Central Banking:
So this was the new - the first meeting under the new format.
I wondered if you could talk a bit about whether the nature of
discussion had changed at all, given the increased scrutiny
particularly of the second session?
Mark Carney:
The nature of the discussion - I wouldn’t say the nature of the
discussion changed as a result of the format.  I would say,
and hopefully it bears out, that the - well you'll be the judge,
but my personal impression is probably a sharper connection
between the minutes, the Inflation Report and we’ve added
what we call a Monetary Policy Summary, which is quite
helpful because that is in effect - it’s the first place I would go
in terms of the thinking of the Committee.  How do we see
the trade-off at present?  Over what time horizon do we think
we need to bring inflation back to target?  What’s our
strategy to do so?  And then the main elements of the
forecast.  So for the first - we’re stepping back.
Now that’s something - and many of those elements will look
a bit familiar this month because many of them are in the
letter to the Chancellor, but where this will be particularly
relevant is when we don’t have to write a letter to the
Chancellor, when we’re back within the zone, we still will
have the discipline.  And I think the discipline of stepping
back to that was helpful as well in terms of forming an
opinion.  Minouche, do you want to -?
Minouche Shafik:
Yes.  I mean, I think as you said, the minutes I think are
fresher because we prepare them immediately after the
discussions and I think that’s a good thing.  And the
consistency across the three products I think is also better.
So I think it was - I think as members of the Committee we
felt the staff did an excellent job of pulling it all together so
quickly in time for all of you today.
Robert Peston, BBC:
Inevitably we all obsess about when interest rates are going
to rise but it’s also of some importance that you own £375bn
worth of UK government debt.  You took the decision in the
latest meeting to reinvest £17 bn worth of maturing debt in
new bonds.  Why isn’t this the moment to start paying or
reducing the holding of UK government debt?  And if this isn’t
the right moment, when would be the right moment?
Mark Carney:
Well the first thing - let me just state what the policy of the
MPC is because it’s an agreed policy of all of us - is that we
will continue to reinvest any maturing proceeds at least until
we begin to raise interest rates.  So with that policy sort of
mechanically follows - and that’s to provide guidance to the
market, clarity of the market that our marginal instrument of
monetary policy is going to be the interest rate, is going to be
Bank Rate at least initially.
We further said that we will not sell any - make outright sales
of any of our gilts until we have raised interest rates to a
level from which we can materially cut them.  Again the
common theme behind both of those points is that we want
to use bank rate as the marginal policy - the marginal
instrument of monetary policy.  We have - there's lots of
uncertainties, imperfections, etc., but we have a much better
sense of the transmission mechanism of changing interest
rates in this economy than we do for a given adjustment in
the level of gilts.
And I think the market also would have a much better sense
for given change in interest rates on what prospective future
interest rate changes might be as opposed to discrete
decisions about whether we reinvest this lot of gilts or sell
that lot of gilts.
I think your question though goes to an important point which
we have discussed as a Committee and we’ll develop over
time, which is to think about how we can provide greater
guidance and clarity about our plans for that stock of debt.
I’ll be clear that these are decisions of monetary policy, these
are monetary policy decisions, because they will affect overall
conditions and affect our ability to hit the inflation target.  We
will want to co-ordinate those decisions as much as possible
with the debt management office because £375bn of gilts is a
material amount, and what’s incumbent on us is - and
Minouche is leading this work - is to work through and then
provide as much clarity as possible in advance about the
potential programme.
But all of that presumes first, movements in interest rates,
and for anything above decisions around just reinvestments,
likely material moves in interest rates before we make those
decisions.
Szu Chan, The Telegraph:
Governor, could you give us perhaps a deeper insight into any
changes in the mood music between the July meeting and the
August meeting in light of the new forecast.  Obviously the
minutes show a clear divergence with one member voting for
a rate hike, another saying there's risk to sort of wage and
price expectations in the near term maybe holding off.  Would
you say that more members are thinking about upside risk to
the inflation forecast than a month ago?
Mark Carney:
Well I think - let me first go from May, which is that - there
were some big developments since May that would have
otherwise pushed down on the inflation forecast.  So we had
a big move up in sterling, 3.5 percentage points; the rate
curve moved up to a notable amount; and depending on how
you interpret the labour market data and productivity, there's
also - there had not been a reduction in spare capacity as
much as we would have expected.
Now set against that was a reduction in some of the external
risks, the Greek risk specifically; although there's still residual
risk around Greece - we shouldn't forget that.  But a
reduction in some of the external risk.  And this continuation
of domestic momentum - robust domestic momentum -
investment led, as well as household consumption and
supported by wages.  So for a number of members, it makes
these decisions more poignant and they reflect on it.
I think the minutes faithfully represent where the Committee
is, as you would expect.  There's the specific vote on whether
to move rates today, which is 8 to 1 not to.  There's some of
those members see more upside risk to the inflation forecast
than others do.  And these are fine judgements; it's
absolutely appropriate in a committee of nine individuals that
some would think that for example there's a little less slack,
there might be a little less pass-through, the economy might
have a little more momentum, and all of that would play into
individual perspectives on the timing.  So I would just draw
your attention to that.
Look, as the economy progresses, and if the economy
progresses broadly in line with this forecast, the decision
about when to move interest rates is going to come into
sharper relief - that's the way it works.  And there were some
big changes between May and August.  But as I said in my
opening remarks - as a whole, in the judgement of the
Committee, we're moving closer to the point at which the first
interest rate increase may happen.
Jenny Scott:
I'm afraid that's all we've got time for.  Thank you everybody
for a long morning.  Thank you.
