MONETARY POLICY PRESS CONFERENCE
Thursday 8 May 2025
Opening remarks by Andrew Bailey, Governor
The disinflation process in the UK economy has continued.  UK inflation was 2.6% in
the latest data for March.  That is above our 2% target.  But it is a little lower than
expected.  With the progress we have made, we can take another step in making
monetary policy less restrictive.
So today, we have we cut Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4.25%.
As the past few weeks demonstrate, the global economic environment remains an
uncertain one.  Interest rates are not on autopilot.  They cannot be.  Instead, the
MPC must continue to respond carefully to the evolving economic circumstances
and the outlook for inflation in the UK. Whatever happens, the MPC will continue to
set Bank Rate to ensure that inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target in the
medium term.
I will return to the global economy shortly.  But I will start with – and spend most of
my time on – what is happening in the UK economy.  That is ultimately what matters
for UK inflation and monetary policy.  I will have four key messages, reflecting our
four key judgements on the outlook, before concluding with the uncertainties we face
and the implications for monetary policy.
My first key message is that disinflation in domestic price and wage pressures is
continuing.  While headline inflation is expected to rise in the near term, we do not
expect it to persist.
Chart 1 shows the development of twelve-month consumer price inflation since 2021
(white line) along with its components.  As the Chart shows, headline inflation has
been around the 2% target over the past year, albeit slightly above it on average.  In
the shaded area, the Chart shows how we expect headline inflation to rise to about
3.5% in the coming months.
This is a little less than we projected in February.  And we expect the increase to be
temporary.
Chart 2 illustrates why.  It shows that the expected increase in inflation is driven
mostly by energy prices (now in yellow), and besides that by increases in regulated
water bills (purple bars), indexed bills for services such as broadband and mobile
phones (orange bars) and higher national insurance contributions (in light blue).
These price increases are not directly linked to the underlying cost pressures in the
UK economy.  We should not expect them to persist.  Meanwhile, other services
prices (darker blue bars) – those that are more closely linked to activity and cost
pressures – are on course to pull down on inflation in the coming months.
As the effects of volatile energy prices and indexed and regulated price changes
pass through, it is not least the path for these other services prices that will
determine headline inflation.  And the path for services inflation points to a continued
gradual easing of inflationary pressure in the UK economy.
This is shown in Chart 3.  While their levels remain elevated, measures of underlying
services price inflation have continued to diminish.  This has happened as pressures
from non-labour input costs have faded.  So persistence in wage growth is now the
main driver of continued high levels of services price inflation.
My second key message is that a small margin of slack has opened up in the UK
economy, and we expect it to widen over the next couple of years.
Heightened uncertainty, weak productivity growth and the continued restrictive
stance of monetary policy have all been weighing on GDP growth recently.
Businesses have been cautious about investing.  And while real household incomes
have risen quite strongly, consumption has not followed suit.
This weakness in demand has coincided with continued weakness in the potential
supply capacity of the UK economy.   Productivity growth has been weak.
Nevertheless, labour market developments, survey indicators of capacity utilisation
and statistical estimates all suggest that weaker demand has led to a small margin of
economic slack opening up.
Looking through data volatility, we expect underlying GDP growth to remain subdued
in the near term before economic activity starts to pick up later this year as
household spending and business investment recover, supported by a downward
path for interest rates.   We expect housing investment to strengthen too.
Assuming potential productivity recovers some of its recent weakness, that pickup in
GDP growth will still probably go hand in hand with a wider margin of slack.
This takes me to my third key message.  An emerging margin of slack in the UK
economy should act against any remaining persistence in domestic wage and price
setting to return inflation to the 2% target sustainably.
A normalisation in wage growth is particularly important to ensure that services price
inflation continues to fall back to levels consistent with the 2% target for headline
consumer price inflation.
This process still has some way to go.  Annual private sector regular average weekly
earnings growth was 5.9% in the three months to February, having risen in the
second half of last year.
This was slightly lower than we expected in the February Report, however.  As Chart
4 shows, underlying measures – estimated by Bank staff – have been more stable
and point to a slightly lower rate of wage growth.  And as we look ahead over the
course of this year, we expect wage growth to moderate with a loosening in labour
market conditions.  This is supported by forward-looking indicators.  The Bank’s
latest Decision Maker Panel survey suggests that wage growth will be about 4% for
the year ahead (yellow diamond), and the Bank’s Agents point to average pay rises
for 2025 between 3.5% and 4% (purple diamond).
With a continued easing in labour as well as non-labour costs, further declines in
services price inflation will support a gradual return of headline inflation to the target
as we look beyond the near-term increase.
As shown in Chart 5, in our baseline projection conditional on the market-implied
path for Bank Rate, inflation gradually falls from later this year to reach around the
2% target within two years’ time.
My fourth key message is about the global economy.  New tariffs and elevated trade
policy uncertainty weigh on global activity.  We expect global trade prices to be
materially weaker, particularly in China.
The US administration has made a series of announcements with significant
changes to tariff polices.  Some of its trade partners have responded.  Volatility in
financial markets has accompanied these announcements.
Slower growth in the global economy is likely to reduce the demand for our exports
and impact economic activity here in the UK.  That reduction in external demand will
also work to reduce inflationary pressures in the economy.
But while the impact of what we have seen so far is likely to push inflation down
somewhat, the overall impact on inflation remains uncertain.  On the one hand, lower
US demand for global exports, particularly from China, could lead to lower global
export prices and hence lower prices for the UK, reducing inflationary pressures
further.  On the other hand, higher costs in the global supply chain – as intermediate
inputs are subjected to tariffs or because of disruptions – could push up on prices.
While sterling has appreciated in recent weeks, easing inflationary pressures, global
exchange rates can shift in response to trade policy news and the evolution of global
risk sentiment.
Although they understandably dominate the headlines, it is important to remember
that global trade policies, and how they affect the UK economy, is only one source of
risk to the outlook for inflation in the UK.
The MPC is alert to a range of risks in both directions.  Domestic inflationary
pressures could persist for longer than we expect, despite the progress we have
made, or they could ease more quickly as the margin of slack widens.  The balance
between supply and demand in the UK economy, and how it will develop over the
forecast horizon, also remains highly uncertain.  We need to watch very carefully for
any signs that the near-term increase in inflation could lead to additional second-
round effects on wage and price-setting, even if that is not our central assumption,
but also for any further weakening in demand which would reduce inflationary
pressure.
In the Monetary Policy Report, we present two scenarios in addition to a baseline
projection for activity and inflation to illustrate some of these risks.  In one scenario,
there could be weaker supply and more persistence in domestic wages and prices,
including from second-round effects related to the near-term increase in headline
inflation.  In the other scenario, inflationary pressures could ease more quickly owing
to greater or longer-lasting weakness in demand relative to supply, in part reflecting
uncertainties globally and domestically.
Considering all the risks, we will continue to monitor closely the accumulation of
evidence on the outlook for inflation over the medium term and set Bank Rate
accordingly to meet the 2% target.
To conclude, our restrictive stance of monetary policy has reduced inflationary
pressures in the UK economy.  With the progress we have made, we have been able
to take another step in making monetary policy a little less restrictive today.  A
gradual and careful approach to the further withdrawal of monetary policy restraint
remains appropriate.
And with that, Clare, Dave and I will be happy to take your questions.
