INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE - THURSDAY 3 AUGUST 2017
Mike Peacock (MP): If you could give your name and organisation please.  Wait for the mics to come
around and, as usual, just one each first time round if you could.  Ed and Gemma first up please.
Ed Conway, Sky News: You said in your opening remarks, Governor that Brexit is beginning to affect
potential supply.  I mean, translated, does that mean that the economy has now been damaged by the
vote?  Just supplementary to that, are you now less confident about a smooth transition happening than
you were three months ago.
Mark Carney (MC): In terms of the first part of your question, I think it’s evident.  It’s evident in our
discussions across the country with businesses, it’s evident in our decision-maker panel survey, it’s
evident in other business surveys, it’s evident, I think, in the reporting of a number of people in this
room.  It’s evident that uncertainties about the eventual relationship are weighing on the decisions of
some businesses.  Distilled down from the 1,000 businesses in our decision-maker panel, which is run
by our agents, about 40% of those businesses are affected in some way, either through the supply chain
or end markets by uncertainties around Brexit.  We see it directly in the macroeconomic numbers.
Investment has been weaker than we otherwise would have expected in a very strong world, high
degrees of profitability, ample availability and low cost of capital and limited spare capacity.  The
consequence of that is starting to build, and the judgement of MPC in the forecast is that we will see a
rotation towards business investment.  So we do see business investment picking up from current, very
subdued rates, over the forecast.  It is still below historic rates and the cumulative effect that deferral of
investment is going to mean that the supply capacity of the economy expands at a slower rate.  The
speed limit, if you will, of the economy has slowed.
As I said in the opening statement, that could have consequences for monetary policy, depending on the
evolution of demand.  In terms of transition and other aspects related to the negotiations, because any
transition or implementation arrangement is part of the negotiations-, negotiations which have really
just started.  I wouldn’t handicap the probabilities as we’re not directly involved in those negotiations.
We’ll see how they transpire.  We do think it is important, however, to have a transition arrangement.
Gemma Tetlow, Financial Times: On a similar point, in your forecast, for the long-term you say you
take an average of possible arrangements in the future, but for the short-term transition you are
currently assuming a smooth transition towards that, which might be considered perhaps the best
possible outcome in the short-term would be that very smooth transition.  Is that consistent, and what
would you need to see to actually change your view in the short-term that that smooth outcome will
actually happen?
MP: Well, why don’t I start by quoting the President of the European Council, Donald Tusk?  He has
said, and similar statements have been made by other European authorities, national leaders and
European officials, that a disorderly, disruptive process is in no one’s interest and that we should be
working towards avoiding that.  So whatever the end state, the desire of both sides is to have as smooth
as possible a transition to that end state, so it’s a reasonable assumption.  If I can make a point about
the forecast, the important thing is not necessarily what we think, as people slightly closer -, we’re not
in the negotiations, but maybe slightly closer to the discussions.  It’s not so much what we think, it’s
what UK households and businesses think and how they react to that, and at present, we do not see any
material evidence that their expectation is that the transition would be anything but smooth.  What we
do see is what I just said in response to the first question, which is that uncertainty about market access
post-Brexit is starting to affect some business decisions and has consequences for investment, but
people are not building in the possibility of a more disruptive process in any material way.  So what
does it take?  It takes to see that in behaviour, whether it’s through confidence, whether it’s through
direct discussions, whether it’s in survey evidence, whether it’s more broadly held.
I would underscore, though, that it’s clearly in the interests of both sides in the negotiations to have a
smooth transition to whatever the end state is.  It’s the stated objective of both sides and it’s the way
the economy is behaving at present, so it is the most realistic assumption.
MP:  Simon and then Helia please.
Simon Jack, BBC: How worried are you, Governor, that the growth that we are seeing is fuelled by
rising household borrowing?  If you are, how worried are you that that rise in credit, unemployment at
a 40-year low, inflation above the Bank’s target -  what is it you’re waiting for before raising interest
rates?
MC: Well, I’ll start from where you finished, which is to be absolutely clear what we, as the MPC,
focus on is achieving a sustainable return of inflation to target.  We have been conscious since the
referendum that the principal cause of inflation being above target, in fact the sole cause of inflation
being above target over the course of recent quarters, and as we forecast and continue to forecast, is the
fall in Sterling caused by the markets’ judgement, not endorsing it, but the markets’ judgement about
the implications of Brexit for the UK’s relative prospects.  So, first question is about how to get back to
that and I answered that in the opening statement and the Committee did in the report.  The second
thing, to go to the question of, ‘To what extent is the recovery a product of borrowing?’  In fact, what
we’re seeing now is that consumers are adjusting to the squeeze on real incomes.  That’s one of the
reasons why growth slowed in the first half of the year, it’s one of the reasons why we think growth
will be relatively sluggish this quarter, before only modestly picking up.  Over the course of the
forecast, we expect consumption growth to be broadly in line with income growth.  Again, it’s not a
forecast that relies particularly on the consumer.  Investment and exports are much more important than
the consumer, going forward.  The consumer, his or herself, is relying on what they’re getting paid, not
what they can borrow.
Next point, again, to put it into context, is that this country and the UK households have gone through a
decade of very painful deleveraging.  It’s only really in the last year that growth of debt has started to
exceed income, so there has been some borrowing.  Consumer credit is the minority in that and
mortgages are still much more important.  There are some issues that the FPC has raised around the
nature of some of the credit that’s on offer and the potential channels for financial stability because of
some developments in the consumer credit side.  That’s part of the reason why a return to a more
standard risk-taking environment, the countercyclical capital buffer has been raised, as you know.  It’s
part of the reason why the adjustment has been made to the stress test and some guidance being given
around underwriting standards through the PRA supervisors to banks.  What those measures are for are
to address tail risks to the economy, not central expectations.  The central likelihood, as I say, is what
the forecast is here which is that we have a relatively modest recovery, one that’s matching the growth
of supply, that it’s principally driven, at least initially, by investments and then exports.  A consumer
that’s consuming out of his or her income, as opposed to borrowing.
Simon Jack, BBC: You said that, about consumer credit, that there was a spiralling complacency in
lenders about that, one of your senior officials, and you flagged it up as a danger before.
MC: First off, you’re not quoting me in that line.  Secondly, the issue that we have, and this is now
we’re moving quite a ways away from monetary policy because this is not what’s driving the economy,
okay?  I’m going to say that again.  This is not what’s driving the economy.  It’s an issue for a subset of
borrowers and a subset of lenders.  The percentage of vulnerable consumers, so consumers who have
debt service requirements more than 40% of their income, is 1.25%. It was 2.5% five years ago.  Again,
keep it in context.  The thing we have to worry about, as the other side of the Bank, if you will, is that
underwriters don’t shift from good standards to irresponsible standards, responsible to reckless. Where
we get concerned and what we’re clamping down on with the PRA is cases where some lenders have
started to extrapolate the good times to assume that in the event that the economy does slow that their
losses will be lower.  That’s an important thing to deal with, but, again, in the big picture this is good
housekeeping as opposed to the core issues.
Helia Ebrahimi, Channel 4 News: Governor, can I pick up on something you said earlier, because in
May the Committee said that it assumed there would be a smooth adjustment in the transitional period.
This time around, the Bank seems to have lost confidence in trying to predict such an outcome because
the language has changed.  It now says that companies and households assume there will be a smooth
transitional arrangement.  Is that because there’s less clarity about the transitional period than there was
three months ago, and at what point will households and companies need to have something in place
before they too lose faith with the smooth transitional period?
MC: Helia, you’re far cleverer than the MPC. You’ve read something into words that isn’t there.  What
matters is not what we think, it’s what households and businesses across the country think about the
end state.  Certainly, over the policy horizon that’s what matters because that will drive whether or not
the economy moves into excess demand and out of excess supply into excess demand.  There are a
series of issues around Brexit about which we are not necessarily better informed, but are much more in
the public domain than they were several months ago, back in May.  That’s got to be a healthy thing.
It’s part of a discussion of the end state and the transition to the end state.  I think the first part of your
question was implying that we have necessarily learned something over recent months regarding these
issues and I would say we haven’t.
MP:  Okay. David Smith and then David Goodman, back middle.
David Smith, Sunday Times: Governor, can I ask you to elaborate slightly on the reduced rate of
potential growth that you referred to?  It looks, from the monetary policy summary, that that reduced
rate is around 1.75% a year, maybe a bit less than that.  How does that compare with what the Bank
believe the rate of potential growth was a little over a year ago?
MC: I’ll start and I’ll hand to Ben to elaborate.  A little less than 1.75% is the important thing.  A
gradual accumulation of disappointments on productivity, as you’re well familiar, but also an
accumulation of, if I can put it this way, stock shortfalls in capital.  We have a prolonged period of
relatively weak investment.  Initially, post-crisis, we all understood about the biggest constraints, both
fundamental uncertainties in the economy and secondly access to capital.  The latter has been solved.
There’s new aspects of uncertainty that seem to be weighing down, and there is bigger restructuring to
be done which longer term can be very positive, obviously, but as we re-orient trading relationships,
there will be, as I said at the start, some sectors which contract and others which expand.  That process,
as you’ve seen in the past, normally drags a bit on productivity before it expands, so we have that
aspect.  I would underscore we haven’t made any change to our assumption on the labour supply side.
We just take the ONS view on net migration as part of this and different people could describe different
risks to that.  We’re, as I say, just taking a base assumption.
Big picture, this has moved down, as you know, from pre-crisis of 2.25, 2.4.  Some of that was
ephemeral supply, if you will, because it was based in the financial sector, but certainly there’s been a
steady shaving of basis points, if you will, at a time when other indicators in the performance of the
economy, particularly in the labour market, has been using up supply.  Obviously, that’s a good news
story.  We’d rather have unemployment at a 40-year low than the contrary, but it does have
implications for monetary policy, as I said.
Ben Broadbent (BB): If by ‘reduced’ you mean relative, I would echo what the Governor just said,
relative to pre-crisis rates then we’ve be living with this very low rate of productivity growth for quite
some time now.  There were some adjustments after last summer and we expected weaker investment
growth and in turn, that weaker investment to feed through to slightly lower productivity growth.
These things are all very uncertain, but I think the important point is that one should not think that the
economy, at the moment, can grow at the sort of rates we used to enjoy, certainly before the crisis
before running into inflationary pressure.
David Goodman, Bloomberg: Governor, you say for the second inflation report in a row that policy
could need to be tightened by a greater extent than is currently implied by the yield curve.  Do you
think the curve is currently underestimating the timing of the first hike, the number of hikes or both
across the period?
MC: Look, I don’t think it’s appropriate for me to tie the hands of the Committee by expanding on our
view as a Committee, particularly with respect to timing.  To recap, as clearly as I can, in terms of our
perspective, we have been operating in exceptional circumstances, we will be for some time because of
the extraordinary nature of the Brexit process and what that has done to all aspects of the economy
relevant to the inflation target; exchange rate, demand/supply.  Those exceptional circumstances have
meant that we can take a judgement, if we think it’s appropriate, to take a little longer to bring inflation
back to target, in order to trade off above-target inflation which is caused by the exchange rate and the
degree of spare capacity in the economy, particularly in the labour market.  As time goes on and that
spare capacity is used up, that trade-off lessens.  Ultimately, by the end of this forecast, on the basis
that the market curve goes away and in fact still have inflation above target in year three, it follows
from that, in the judgement of the Committee, it would be appropriate, if we knew the world was going
to transpire as per our forecast, to withdraw more stimulus than the market currently has embedded.
Timing, degree, amounts, beyond that general direction, we’re giving you that, but we’re not going to
further specify.
I would underscore that conversation that we’ve been having with the questions which is about relative
supply and demand growth, and that the supply capacity not just being used up as the economy has
progressed, but actually, the judgement of the Committee is it’s going to grow at more modest rates,
certainly to the distant part.  So, while the economy is sluggish at present, it doesn’t have to pick up
that much in order to take back further supply and focus the attention of the committee.
MP:  Jason then Hugo.
Jason Douglas, Wall Street Journal: Just also on interest rates, can I just ask please how the MPC is
thinking about that first move back to 0.5%?  Should we think of it as the start of a traditional
tightening cycle like other banks are doing, albeit one that’s going to be more gradual than it has been
in the past?  Or is there an argument at all that this could be a one-off to withdraw this extra bit of
stimulus you put in place last year because of these extraordinary circumstances that you described?
MC: We’re pretty clear, I think, about the way we’re thinking about it which is that the first thing is
that we’ve conditioned the forecast on the market curve in the run-up and that curve had more than one
interest rate hike over the course of three years.  We think that would be insufficient relative to what
would be required in order to fulfil our mandate.  Those increases would be done at a gradual pace and
relative, and you use ‘traditional hiking cycle’ but tradition has gone for some time.  So relative to a
traditional hiking cycle to a limited extent, but more than the market, less than traditional.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail: Governor, you appear to be warning households and businesses to get
ready for rates to rise, albeit slowly, over the coming year or possibly three years, while at the same
time warning that the economy is sluggish, that wage growth is weak and that business investment is
below what it could otherwise be.  How can you be so confident that the economy can withstand such
rate rises against such a gloomy backdrop?
MC: Well, first thing to state is that we haven’t actually changed interest rates at this meeting, so
maybe we should just make that absolutely clear.  Secondly, that we have a pretty good read on
households’ position.  In fact, our most recent survey of thousands of households which we did with
the NMG looked into, as you would expect, exactly these questions which is what would happen if they
either have an income shock or a rate shock and how would they adjust?  Consistent with the response
to Simon Jack, we’re in a position where households are less vulnerable than they were.  Now, there
are vulnerable households, we recognise that, and we certainly recognise that it is a difficult period
when real incomes are negative across the country as a whole.  In terms of the overall position of
households, there is an ability to withstand an adjustment to monetary policy, if it’s appropriate. It
being appropriate is a function of where the economy is, and that is going to be more, in our judgement,
more or a function, of not what households do, but what businesses and exporters do.  We do think that
there are reasons to expect some modest uptake in contribution from both of those sectors.
MP:  Szu there, then Harry.
Szu Chan, Telegraph:  Just to follow up from Hugo’s question.  Given that we are shifting to a world
where weaker productivity growth means that rate rises might be necessary, even though we might see
weaker growth rates and pay rates than the past, what is your message to households who have been
driving down savings or borrowing a bit more in the hope of sunnier days ahead?  Also, in your
conversations with businesses, what have they been telling you about the difference a quicker
transitional arrangement would make to their investment plans, which could affect productivity in the
future?
MC: Okay.  I’ll start on transition and then start on the first bit of your question and then go to Ben.  In
terms of transition, consistently across sectors, so not limited to the financial sector, manufacturing
sector, range of service sectors, there is a desire for some form of transition arrangement.  There is an
understanding that there are a series of issues, market access issues, product standards issues,
authorisation issues, data issues, that will affect both sides of what is quite an integrated economy
between the United Kingdom and the EU 27.  It’s pretty clear that in the first best world for Europe and
for the United Kingdom, there would be some transition to whatever end state is agreed.  Exactly what
that end state is, exactly what that transition or implementation period will look like or be, that’s a core
part of the negotiations and it’s absolutely for others to answer.  In terms of message to households and
what’s going on in the economy right now, we’re going through a sluggish period in the economy.
We’re not growing as fast as we did post-2013.  Part of that is for reasons exactly what they’re feeling,
which is that real incomes are being squeezed because prices are going up in the shop and wages
haven’t been growing as rapidly.  The second thing to say is that we think we’re in the teeth of this
right now.
Over the course of the next couple of quarters, it will continue to feel like this, but then as we move
into the new year we see inflation start to come down and household income start to go up so that we
move out of this real income squeeze.  I’m not saying roaring out of this real income squeeze, but we
move out of this real income squeeze.  The third thing is to recognise that we are in a position of
strength.  We made a decision a year ago.  We could see this inflation coming because of the exchange
rate, we could see why it was driven and we took a decision to take this more in prices than jobs.
We’re now in a position where unemployment is at a 40-year low, so that’s a position of strength.
We’re in a position of strength because our financial system is rock solid.  We have rebuilt this
financial system.  We’re also in a position where other bits of the Bank are addressing potential risks in
the economy.  We talked earlier about household debt and issues around consumer credit, I won’t go
into all the acronyms, but behind the acronyms are actual action, whether it’s CCYB or PRA, etc.
We’re also, as people would expect, the Bank in its areas of responsibility is engaged in sustained
contingency planning for all possible outcomes around Brexit, transition deal, no transition deal,
comprehensive agreement, narrow agreement, to take away those potential tail risks.
It is a more difficult time, but in terms of the bigger risks, we’re taking our responsibilities to take those
bigger-, I hate to use the term ‘tail risks’, but I can’t think of another one-, off the table.  Ben, do you
want to?
BB: No, not really.  Only to emphasise what the Governor just said.  Less rapid growth of potential
output and the capacity for real wage rises over the medium-term doesn’t mean no growth.  I still think
it’s reasonable, the Committee certainly still thinks it’s reasonable, that with unemployment at very low
levels, we will see faster growth of nominal wages over the forecast period than we have over the last
couple of years.  We’ve been disappointed by that, but still think that’s the reasonable judgement.  As
the Governor just said, we are right at the zenith, if that’s the right word, of these pass through effects
and the hit they’re imparting to real incomes.  Those will dissipate.  They’ll stay at this level for a while
yet, but then they’ll begin to fall away and households will feel the benefit of that.  So things are
particularly tough right now.  With regard to the borrowing point you made, I just want again to echo
something the Governor said earlier about keeping these numbers in context.  So consumer credit has
gone up 10% over the last year and a bit over the previous year.  Total household borrowing from
banks is up over the last year by 3.9% in the year to June.  This is really not big, big numbers and
nothing remotely like what we saw prior to the crisis.  The level of unsold debt is still materially lower,
relative to income, than it was for many, many years prior to the crisis, actually.  So one should keep
numbers in context.
Harry Daniels, Livesquawk: What has materially changed between your speech in Portugal at the end
of June and now for a slight reining back expectations around a rate rise?  If we’re in a new
environment, would you consider less than a 0.25 basis point move higher in rates when you start that
incremental-,
MC: To the latter thing, there has been no discussion of that, so I wouldn’t put any weight on changing
the increment.  Secondly, obviously when I spoke in Sinta I spoke for myself, but I view what I said
there as entirely consistent with what we’re saying here.  The difference is that now we have an
updated forecast of the Committee which uses a higher rate curve than existed at the time.  The
Committee’s judgment, which I share, is that some more withdrawal of monetary stimulus would be
required above and beyond that, if the economy is preceding consistent with that forecast.
MP: Can you give a mic to Katie on your left?  Then we’ll go to Ben.
Katie Allen, Guardian: I Just wanted to come back to wage growth again.  You’ve trimmed the
forecast for wage growth.  Can you say how much of that is down to, according to the Bank’s work, the
change in perhaps the nature of employment?  Types of jobs people are in, their ability to negotiate pay
rises at the moment.
MC: Let me start out then Ben expand.  First, the big elements here are productivity, softer
productivity.  Ultimately productivity gets shared out between firms and workers, so that softer
productivity which is, in part, a product of accumulated lower investment and prolonged period of
lower investment, helps explain that.  The second thing, what we’re picking up across the country at a
number of firms is that there is an element of Brexit uncertainty which is affecting the wage bargaining.
A potentially material number of firms are less willing to give bigger pay rises given that it’s not as
clear what their market access is going to be over the course of the next few years.  Then there is an
unexplained element to this.  We have a relatively tight job market and we do think that wages are
going to begin to firm.  We’re seeing, and one doesn’t want to over-interpret, but certainly on a survey
basis and some very recent data, some elements of that firming.  We’ll see if it’s consistent.  To me,
those are the big drivers.
BB: Yes, I think we should bear in mind the big influence on real wages over the last year, as you
know, has been rising import prices.  Over the last ten years, it’s been weak productivity growth.  There
have not been material changes in the share of domestic income going to profits on the one hand and
wages on the other.  In fact, that share of labour income has fallen slightly over the last year, but over
the forecast we expect it to go back up again.  I think the big picture, predominant influence on wages
have been these much bigger trends in productivity growth and more recently, import prices, rather
than necessarily changes in the nature of the labour market.  Although we do pick up, last year at least,
some signs that some firms have been a little bit cautious on pay awards because of uncertainty about
Brexit.
MP:  Ben, down there.
Ben Chu, Independent: Governor, you mentioned that the Bank is engaged in contingency planning
for all states of the world in 2019, whether a transitional deal or no transitional deal.  Could you give us
some sense of how advanced you are in making those plans?  Are we going to see, at any stage, some
of the economic analysis underpinning those various scenarios?  As you know, there are those who say
that if we crash out of Europe with no deal at all, it will be a great boon for our economy.
MC: Okay, there’s a fair bit in that.  On the contingency plans, they are extensive.  We started from
prior to the referendum, but it certainly accelerated post the people’s decision.  There are a range of
issues and these, at a high level, have been detailed, detailed in the last Financial Stability Report.
There are a range of cross-cutting issues, so issues around access to data, issues around contractual
continuity, the latter in insurance and in derivative markets.  There are different potential fixes
depending on the type of market, so we’re engaged with others, including the private sector, to address
those issues.  Some issues might require legislative cures or cures through the nature of the agreement,
so obviously we work in close concert with the Treasury and Her Majesty’s Government, as necessary.
I want to reassure you that there are a range of issues, including cross-cutting ones, where we’re very
actively engaged and we think we’ve identified the main ones.  The second bucket, if you will, relates
to the plans of financial firms, both those who are headquartered here and potentially may lose some
market access in Europe, and those that are based in Europe and are interactive here.  It’s a quasi-public
process anchored around a so-called ‘Dear CEO letter’ by Sam Woods, the CEO of the PRA to the
CEOs of all these institutions for their contingency plans.
The fact is, we had most of people’s contingency plans prior to this, but now we’re getting in their
latest and comprehensive and it’s covering everybody across banks and insurers in the UK.  There will
be firm-specific issues, as well as issues of general application, that we’ll be addressing.  You snuck in
there a very big macro question which is probably a question for another day, but there is a reason why
we’re engaged in extensive contingency planning which is to take out some big tail risks from financial
stability, which obviously would affect the economy.  Then there’s a separate question which is, ‘What
is the impact of the economy of moving from the relationship we currently have with the EU to a WTO
relationship with the EU overnight?’  So you can strip out financial stability amplifiers to that, but then
there’s just a fundamental economic question.  To bring it back to today, what we’re seeing is that
financial markets are putting a certain weight on that.  Business uncertainty and the weight of financial
markets is flowing through to households through the Sterling and inflation channel.  Businesses are
putting a certain weight on that and that’s affecting investment and potentially some of the wage
bargaining.  All of that comes together and we have to make judgements about the impact on growth
and inflation.  We can do so and are doing so.
I think what this all underscores is that, and it goes a bit back to earlier questions about messages to
households in difficult circumstances, the big, big macro decisions are not the decisions of the Bank of
England in this environment.  The decisions of the Bank of England-, monetary financial stability. we
have to get them right so that the environment for adjustment is appropriate.  What’s going to move the
needle, what’s going to change the prospects of real incomes for households and prospects for
businesses is going to be this negotiation with Europe, other negotiations with other countries and the
transitions to those.  That is the story and we play a supporting but very much second-tier role in this,
to just ensure that the economy can flexibly respond to that.  So there are limits.  We’re clearly in the
territory of limits to monetary policy when we start discussing, what can we do to change the real
income profile for households?
MC:  Jasper, back middle and Mathijs right at the back.
Jasper Jolly, City AM: You noted in the statement that there are a few signs of domestically-
generated inflation, but you also said that the market might be underestimating how early a rate hike is
going to come, or multiple rate hikes are going to come.  Is it viable to have multiple rate hikes while
there are few signs of domestically-generated inflation?
MC: So you didn’t quite accurately quote either of what we said in those cases I’m afraid, Jasper, on
important issues, so I’m going to have to correct if you don’t mind.  The first thing is that what we say,
and we go into some detail in the report, is that most measures of domestically-generated inflation are
not yet at target-consistent rates, so we detail in the report a series of measures of so-called DGI.
They’re not yet at rates that have historically been consistent with inflation being at the 2% target.  The
most obvious and, I would say, the most easily measured and almost cleanest one relates to average
weekly earnings and estimates of unit labour costs.  We do expect those to build, and I would say that
it’s not a universal story.  There are some that are close to target-consistent rates and even though there
may be some element of exchange rate pass through there, we look at those closely.  There are signs,
and we have an expectation that domestically-generated inflation will build over the course of the
forecast period, and of course what we want to happen is that it builds to levels consistent with the
inflation target and doesn’t overshoot from that point.  Which is why we’re having as much of a
discussion around where supply capacity is and demand relative to that.  We did not give any signal on
timing of rates.  I think people caught up on that.
Mathijs Schiffers, Dutch Financial Times: There is a modest strike going on in front of this building.
It is modest, but related to an interesting topic, of course. It’s about the cap of 1% for the public pay
rise.  Should the government abandon this policy at the moment?  It gives a good example to give the
people some wage growth.  Do they not have a point, because they are losing out at the moment?
Inflation is much higher than their pay rise.
MC: Your German readers want to know the answer to this?  Let me say a couple of things about that
question because it’s an important question.  I think the first thing is that, in terms of the strike here, it’s
regrettable and that we were in discussions right up to the day before the strike, including at the ACAS,
which is the mediation service.  My colleagues at the Bank stand ready to resume discussions at any
time.  I do want to reassure, which I think is clear, but I’ll take the moment to reassure, that given the
strike is 1% of employees we’re fully covered and operating as business as usual at the institution and
will continue to be so.  Now, moving to your question which is the broader environment.  I think it is
important to look at it in the context of the broader environment, and I wouldn’t start in the public
sector first, I’d start in the private sector.  This country has been in a prolonged period of very weak
private sector wages.  That’s related to the productivity performance, but other factors and in fact,
we’re in a period where, over the course of over a decade now, real incomes are negative, so real
income growth relative to where it was prior to the crisis, real income levels in real terms, on average is
still below where it was in 2007/8.  That’s driven by the private sector.  In that context, for a variety of
reasons, it’s understandable that there is public sector wage restraint.
The Bank of England is separate from the government, it is a public institution and obviously we
operate in that context.  We operate with a limited budget and we have to be fair, both to our
employees, use that limited budget within the group of people who work at the institution to
compensate those who are most underpaid relative to their peers and relative to people outside this
institution.  We have to be fair, to go back to the general point which is to taxpayers, to operate with
restraint consistent with the overall environment.  That all means difficult decisions that have to be
made.  We share those difficult decisions with others in the public sector and I think all of us in the
public sector are conscious that in the private sector, a series of difficult decisions and disappointments
have been there.  That’s the macro-environment.  In the end, to bring it back to monetary policy if I
may, monetary policy is not going to shift those fundamental drivers of those wages.  Much bigger
structural decisions and the big structural decisions are around Brexit and other trading relationships
right now in the UK.  A series of decisions by private entities, businesses across the country that are of
course heavily influenced by Brexit but not exclusively influenced by Brexit, that’s what will
determine when wages actually sustainably begin to rise.
MP: We’ll go back to Helia one last time as I believe she’s representing two broadcasters today.
Helia Ebrahimi, Channel 4: Back to the transitional agreement.  If the transitional agreement doesn’t
include access to the single market or the customs union, does that mean that economic growth will be
damaged?
MC: Look, relative to the current arrangements, in the medium term, any agreement, and if I isolate it
to just to the agreement, that reduces access to aspects of our largest trading partner, is likely to reduce
the level of economic activity in this country.  The bigger question, of course, is what else comes
alongside that?  What other agreements might be struck with other trading partners?  What other
measures and elements might be taken?  If you just isolate it to that decision, it has those impacts and
entirely understandable uncertainty about that decision and the scope of that is affecting, to varying
degrees, financial markets, businesses and households in this country has, feeds back into the balance
of demand and supply in this economy, inflationary pressures and the stance of monetary policy.
Cat Contiguglia, Politico: On the transition period, is there a certain date that you would say the
government needs to clearly put out their transition plan or we’re really going to see a slide?  For
example, your colleague Andrew Elliot FCA said really by the end of the year, this transition plan
needs to be in place.  Beyond that, companies are going to be struggling.
MC: I didn’t see exactly what Andrew said, but in terms of the companies we supervise, they have
started to activate their contingency plans and you see a series of announcements about their
contingency plans, potential destinations and in some cases more sophisticated announcements of
moves of activity and potentially moves of personnel-, I would say, none of which is news to us, all of
which we had line of sight in advance, as you’d expect.  In general, the time it takes to move to one
variant of end state is something around the order of eighteen months.  So you can work backwards.  It
varies by institution, it varies by what their assumption is about access, it varies about assumptions
about the degree of regulatory cooperation.  I think that the converse is also true for institutions that are
operating in this country.  If you work backwards from that timeline, it gives you a sense of when it
would be most useful.  The advantages of institutions that potentially have to move to Europe of
remaining in London are quite considerable.  So even some costs of moving they would overlook.
Certainly there is a path dependence and as people move and clients are restructured and repapered and
capital and collateral moves, it becomes more of a fait accompli as time goes on.
MP:  Final, final one to Ed and then we’re out of time I’m afraid.
Ed Conway, Sky: It’s a slightly chewy question, so apologies for finishing on this note.  When you see
those people who are protesting outside, you know, placards and a lot of people are quite angry about
pay and about distribution in this country and the fact that this is the first strike that the Bank has had in
50 years, does it strike you that there’s something happening here?  People are angry.  Many people
across the country and we know what’s happened across the course of the last year or so as a result of
that.  Does it strike you that there’s a phenomenon here?  I know that the Bank doesn’t necessarily get
involved in the distribution of cash around the economy, but does it strike you that there is something
going on that needs to be thought about here?
MC: The first thing is, I repeat something I said a moment ago which is I absolutely recognise-, we
recognise that a series of difficult decisions have had to be taken in this institution over a number of
years-, other public institutions and very much in the private sector as well.  The fact is that, you know
this, that real income growth has not been this weak in this country since the middle of the 19th century
and that is the product of several things.  It’s very much related first to the financial crisis, and now
related to other factors which may prove temporary, but that remains to be seen. These are big, big
structural issues that the country has to face.  We, as the Monetary Policy Committee, have to deal with
the consequences of those.  We have looked with respect to the impact of Brexit and the adjustment to
Brexit to as much as possible cushion that impact in terms of people in work, because ultimately the
biggest distributional issue is between being in work and not being in work, then one moves to
appropriately higher order ones.  We have looked to cushion that as much as possible.  We are in a
position where, as you know, unemployment is at a 40-year low and recent job growth has been full-
time, the participation rate is high, so we’re getting to a point where we have almost done as much as
we can on that front.
We need to ensure that the other side of the equation, the sustainable return of inflation to target, is
achieved.  So yes, we absolutely recognise it, but these are much bigger questions, certainly than
questions that the Monetary Policy Committee or the Bank can address.  A last thing, just to go back to
the Bank as an institution, we have to operate within that bigger environment.  It is entirely right that
we have a limited budget relative to others in the public sector, and that the public sector has a limited
budget relative to a private sector where private sector wages as a whole have been growing at quite
low rate.
BB: To emphasise the macro point, I don’t know if you call it chewy or not, there is a graph in the
inflation report that gets across the point about the importance of productivity trends, 3.10.  There is a
line which has output per head and there’s another line which has the ratio of wages to firms’ prices, so
real product wage.  They track pretty closely together.  You and I talked once before about distribution.
The weakness of real pay is not because the amount of money in the economy has been shifted in large
order from one group to another, it’s because aggregate income per capita has grown extremely
weakly.  Matching the statistic the Governor just gave about the decade of weak real income and
growth, and weakest since the mid-19th century.  The same is true of productivity and that is the
fundamental point, not a distributional one.
MP: This really is the last one.
Adam Linton, Ransquawk: Given the fallout of the UK election and potentially a slightly less austere
Britain moving forwards, maybe a chance for having a say in the books might not necessarily balance
now until 2027.  How are the MPC viewing these developments in the fiscal space and could they
potentially be keeping half an eye on that in order to reduce the burden yourselves on monetary policy,
particularly when there could be things such as the unfreezing of pay caps in the public sector, for
example?
MC: It’s a fair question.  The approach we always take on fiscal is we don’t change our views on fiscal
until fiscal policy changes and then we take stock of that.  Last autumn, we viewed that in the fall
statement, effectively a mini-budget, there was a loosening of fiscal policy or, said more accurately, a
slight reduction in the pace of tightening of fiscal policy over the period of time.  That was one of the
reasons why we marked up our forecast at that time.  We will take stock once the budget is in place and
having balances is desirable, but the biggest sustainable stimulation to this economy are other structural
policies, of which the most important is the outcome of the Brexit negotiations.
MP:  Thank you all for coming.  Enjoy your summer break.  We’ll see you soon.
